

Existential Psychotherapy

      Books by the Same Author
    Theory and Practice of Group Psychotherapy
Every Day Gets a Little Closer: A Twice-Told Therapy
                 (with Ginny Elkin)
           Encounter Groups: First Facts
  (with Morton A. Lieberman and Matthew B. Miles)


  EXISTENTIAL
PSYCHOTHERAPY
  Irvin D Yalom
                    ..•
                BasicBooks
      A Division ofHarperCollinsPublishers


Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Yalom, Irvin D         1931-
  Existential psychotherapy.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  1. Existential psychotherapy. I. Title.
RC489.E93Y34          616.89        80-50553
ISBN: Q-465-Q2147-6
     Copyright @ 1980 by Yalom Family Trust
      Printed in the United States of America
               Designed by Vincent Torre
                  25 24


To Marilyn, for every reason.

                            CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS                                                      xi
CHAPTER 1 I         Introduction                                      3
  Existential Therapy: A Dynamic Psychotherapy 6
  The Existential Orientation: Strange But Oddly Familiar 11
  The Field of Existential Psychotherapy 14
  Existential Therapy and the Academic Community 21
                   PART I I                Death
CHAPTER 2 I         Life, Death, and Anxiety                         29
  Life-Death Interdependence 30
  Death and Anxiety 41
  The Inattention to Death in Psychotherapy Theory and Practice 54
  Freud: Anxiety without Death 59
CHAPTER 3 I         The Concept of Death in Children                 75
  Pervasiveness of Death Concern in Children 76
  Concept of Death: Developmental Stages 78
  Death Anxiety and the Development of Psychopathology      103
  The Death Education of Children 107
CHAPTER 4 I          Death and Psychopathology                      110
  Death Anxiety: A Paradigm of Psychopathology 112
  Specialness 117
  The Ultimate Rescuer 129
  Toward an Integrated View of Psychopathology 141
  Schizophrenia and the Fear of Death 147
  An Existential Paradigm of Psychopathology: Research Evidence  152
                                    vii


                                                               Contents
CHAPTER 5        I Death and Psychotherapy                          159
  Death as a Boundary Situation 159
  Death as a Primary Source of Anxiety 187
  Problems of Psychotherapy 204
  Life Satisfaction and Death Anxiety: A Therapeutic Foothold  207
  Death Desensitization 211
                 PART II             I Freedom
CHAPTER 6         I Responsibility                                  218
  Responsibility as an Existential Concern 218
   Responsibility Avoidance: Clinical Manifestations 223
  Responsibility Assumption and Psychotherapy 231
  Responsibility Awareness American-Style-Or, How to Take
       Charge of Your Own Life, Pull Your Own Strings,
       Take Care of Number One, and Get "It" 253
  Responsibility and Psychotherapy: Research Evidence 261
  Limits of Responsibility 268
  Responsibility and Existential Guilt 276
CHAPTER 7         I Willing                                         286
  Responsibility, Willing, and Action 286
  Toward a Clinical Understanding of Will: Rank, Farber, May    293
  The Will and Clinical Practice 301
  Wish 303
  Decision-Choice 314
  The Past versus the Future in Psy~hotherapy 346
                PART III             I Isolation
CHAPTER 8         I Existential Isolation                           353
  What Is Existential Isolation? 355
  Isolation and Relationship 362
  Existential Isolation and Interpersonal Psychopathology  373
                                    viii


Contents
 CHAPTER 9       I Existential Isolation and Psychotherapy  392
   A Guide to Understanding Interpersonal Relationships 392
    Confronting the Patient with Isolation 397
   Isolation and the Patient-Therapist Encounter 401
        PART IV               I Meaninglessness
CHAPTER 10         I Meaninglessness                        419
   The Problem of Meaning 422
   Meanings of Life 423
   Loss of Meaning: Clinical Implications  447
   Clinical Research 455
CHAPTER 11         I Meaninglessness and Psychotherapy      461
   Why Do We Need Meaning? 462
   Psychotherapeutic Strategies 470
EPILOGUE                                                    485
NOTES                                                       487
INDEX                                                       513
                                    ix


                         ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
MANY                  have helped me in my work, and I am unable to thank
 them all: this book was several years in the writing, and my debts
stretch back beyond,my memory. Rollo May and Dagfinn Follesdal were
exceptionally important teachers and guides. Many colleagues read and
criticized all or parts of the manuscript: Jerome Frank, Julius Heuscher,
 Kent Bach, David Spiegel, Alex Comfort, James Bugental, Marguerite
 Lederberg, Michael Bratman, Mitchell Hall, Alberta Siegel, Alvin Ro-
senfeld, Herbert Leiderman, Michael Norden, and numerous Stan-
ford psychiatric residents. To all, my gratitude.
    I am indebted to Gardner Lindzey and the Center for Advanced
Study in the Behavioral Sciences for providing me with an ideal setting
 for scholarship during my fellowship year of 1977-78. I am deeply
grateful to Stanford University, which throughout my career has ge~­
erously provided me with the equipment of academic life: intellectual
 freedom, material support, and professional colleagues of the highest
 order. I am grateful, too, to Thomas Gonda, Chairman of the Depart-
 ment of Psychiatry, for considerately shielding me from administrative
chores. And to Marjorie Crosby, for her sponsorship and encourage-
 ment. Phoebe Hoss provided magnificent editorial assistance. This is a
 long book, and every word of every draft from first scribblings to fin-
 ished manuscript was typed by my secretary, Bea Mitchell, whose pa-
 tience, exuberance, and diligence rarely flagged over the many years
 we worked together. My wife, Marilyn, provided not only endless sus-
 tenance but, as with all my previous books, invaluable substantive and
 editorial counsel.
 Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to quote from the following sources:
The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, translated and
      edited by James Strachey. By permission of Sigmund Freud Copyrights Ltd., The
      Hogarth Press Ltd., and The Institute of Psycho-Analysis; also of Allen lc Unwin
      Ltd. and Basic Books, Inc.
EST" 60 Hours That Transform Your Life, by Adelaide Bry. Copyright C 1976 by Adelaide
      Bry. Reprinted by permission of Harper lc Row Publishers, Inc.
                                            xi


                                                                     Acknowledgments
Maria Nagy, "The Child's Theories Concerning Death," Journal of Genetic Psychology
      (1948) 73:3-27. Reprinted by permission of the author and The Journal Press.
"Everyman," in M. Abrams, et al., eds., The Norton Anthology of English Literature, vol. I,
      pp. 281-303. Copyright @ 1962. Reprinted by permission of W. W. Norton, Inc.
E. Fromm, D. Suzuki, and R. DeMartino, Zen Buddhism and Psychoanalysis. Copyright @
      1960. Reprinted by permission of Harper &c Row Publishers, Inc.
"Forgive, 0 Lord," from The Poetry of Robert Frost, edited by Edward Connery Lathem.
      Copyright @ 1962 by Robert Frost. Copyright @ 1967 by Holt, Rinehart and Win-
      ston. Reprinted by permission of Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Publishers. Four
      lines from "Desert Places," from The Poetry of Robert Frost, edited by Edward Con-
      nery Lathem. Copyright@ 1936 by Robert Frost. Copyright@ 1964 by Lesley Frost
      Ballantine. Copyright @ 1969 by Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Reprinted by permis-
      sion of Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Publishers.
Purpose in Life Test (PIL) by James C. Crumbaugh and Leonard T. Maholick. Reprinted
      with permission of James C. Crumbaugh. Published by Psychometric Affiliates,
      P. 0. Box 3167, Munster, Indiana 46321.
V. Frankl, "Fragments from the Logotherapeutic Treatment in Four Cases," in A. Burton,
      ed., Modern Psychotherapeutic Practice (Palo Alto, Calif.: Science Behavior Book, Inc.,
      1965). Reprinte~ by permission of Arthur Burton.
                                            xii


Existential Psychotherapy

                 CHAPTER 1
                   Introduction
0       NCE, several years ago, some friends and I enrolled in a cooking
class taught by an Armenian matriarch and her aged servant. Since
they spoke no English and we no Armenian, communication was not
easy. She taught by demonstration; we watched (and diligently tried to
quantify her recipes) as she prepared an array of marvelous eggplant
and lamb dishes. But our recipes were imperfect; and, try as hard as we
could, we could not duplicate her dishes. "What was it," I wondered,
"that gave her cooking that special touch?" The answer eluded me un-
til one day, when I was keeping a particularly keen watch on the kitch-
en proceedings, I saw our teacher, with great dignity and deliberation,
prepare a dish. She handed it to her servant who wordlessly carried it
into the kitchen to the oven and, without breaking stride, threw in
handful after handful of assorted spices and condiments. I am con-
vinced that those surreptitious "throw-ins" made all the difference.
   That cooking class often comes to mind when I think about psycho-
therapy, especially when I think about the critical ingredients of suc-
cessful therapy. Formal texts, journal articles, and lectures portray ther-
apy as precise and systematic, with carefully delineated stages, strategic
technical interventions, the methodical development and resolution of
transference, analysis of object relations, and a careful, rational pro-
gram of insight-offering interpretations. Yet I believe deeply that,
when no one is looking, the therapist throws in the "real thing."
                                                                         3


                                                        1 I Introduction
   But what are these "throw-ins," these elusive, "off the record" ex-
tras? They exist outside of formal theory, they are not written about,
they are not explicitly taught. Therapists are often unaware of them;
yet every therapist knows that he or she cannot explain why many pa-
tients improve. The critical ingredients are hard to describe, even hard-
er to define. Indeed, is it possible to define and teach such qualities as
compassion, "presence," caring, extending oneself, touching the pa-
tient at a profound level, or-that most elusive one of all-wisdom?
   One of the first recorded cases of modern psychotherapy is highly il-
lustrative of how therapists selectively inattend to these extras. 1 (Later
descriptions of therapy are less useful in this regard because psychiatry
became so doctrinaire about the proper conduct of therapy that "off the
record" maneuvers were omitted from case reports.) In 1892, Sigmund
Freud successfully treated Fraulein Elisabeth von R., a young woman
who was suffering from psychogenic difficulties in walking. Freud ex-
plained his therapeutic success solely by his technique of abreaction, of
de-repressing certain noxious wishes and thoughts. However, in study-
ing Freud's notes, one is struck by the vast number of his other thera-
peutic activities. For example, he sent Elisabeth to visit her sister's
grave and to pay a call upon a young man whom she found attractive.
He demonstrated a "friendly interest in her present circumstances" 2 by
interacting with the family in the patient's behalf: he interviewed the
patient's mother and "begged" her to provide open channels of com-
munication with the patient and to permit the patient to unburden her
mind periodically. Having learned from the mother that Elisabeth had
no possibility of marrying her dead sister's husband, he conveyed that
information to his patient. He helped untangle the family financial
tangle. At other times Freud urged Elisabeth to face with calmness the
fact that the future, for everyone, is inevitably uncertain. He repeated-
ly consoled her by assuring her that she was not responsible for un-
wanted feelings, and pointed out that her degree of guilt and remorse
for these feelings was powerful evidence of her high moral character.
Finally, after the termination of therapy, Freud, hearing that Elisabeth
was going to a private dance, procured an invitation so he could watch
her "whirl past in a lively dance." One cannot help but wonder what
really helped Fraulein von R. Freud's extras, I have no doubt, constitut-
ed powerful interventions; to exclude them from theory is to court
error.
   It is my purpose in this book to propose and elucidate an approach to
psychotherapy-a theoretical structure and a series of techniques
emerging from that structure-which will provide a framework for
4


1 I Introduction
many of the extras of therapy. The label for this approach, "existential
psychotherapy," defies succinct definition, for the underpinnings of
the existential orientation are not empirical but are deeply intuitive. I
shall begin by offering a formal definition, and then, throughout the
rest of this book, I shall elucidate that definition: Existential psychothera-
py is a dynamic approach to therapy which focuses on concerns that are rooted
in the individual's existence.
   It is my belief that the vast majority of experienced therapists, re-
gardless of their adherence to some other ideological school, employ
many of the existential insights I shall describe. The majority of thera-
pists realize, for example, that an apprehension of one's finiteness car{l
often catalyze a major inner shift orpefSpective, that it is the relation-
ship that heals, that patients are tormented by choice, that a therapist
must catalyze a patient's "will" to act, and that the majority of patients
are bedeviled by a lack of meaning in their lives.
   But the existential approach is more than a subtle accent or an im-
plicit perspective that therapists unwittingly employ. Over the past
several years, when lecturing to psychotherapists on a variety of topics,
I have asked, "Who among you consider yourselves to be existentially
oriented?" A sizable proportion of the audience, generally over 50 per-
cent, respond affirmatively. But when these therapists are asked,
"What is the existential approach?" they find it difficult to answer. The
language used by therapists to describe any therapeutic approach has
never been celebrated for its crispness or simple clarity; but, of all the
therapy vocabularies, none rivals the existential in vagueness and con-
fusion. Therapists associate the existential approach with such intrinsi-
cally imprecise and apparently unrelated terms as "authenticity,"
"encounter," "responsibility," "choice," "humanistic," "self-actualiza-
tion," "centering," "Sartrean," and "Heideggerian"; and many mental
health professionals have long considered it a muddled, "soft," irratio-
nal, and romantic orientation which, rather than being an "approach,"
offers a license for improvisation, for undisciplined, woolly therapists
to "do their thing." I hope to demonstrate that such conclusions are un-
warranted, that the existential approach is a valuable, effective psycho-
therapeutic paradigm, as rational, as coherent, and as systematic as any
other.
                                                                            5


                                                          1 I Introduction
          Existential Therapy: A Dynamic Psychotherapy
Existential psychotherapy is a form of dynamic psychotherapy. "Dy-
namic" is a term frequently used in the mental health field-as in
"psychodynamics"; and if one is to understand one of the basic features
of the existential approach, it is necessary to be clear about the mean-
ing of dynamic therapy. "Dynamic" has both lay and technical mean-
ings. In the lay sense "dynamic" (deriving from the Greek dunasthi, "to
have strength or power") evokes energy and movement (a "dynamic"
football player or politician, "dynamo," "dynamite"); but this is not its
technical sense for, if it were, what therapist would own to being non-
dynamic-that is, slow, sluggish, stagnant, inert? No, the term has a
specific technical use that involves the concept of "force." Freud's ma-
jor contribution to the understanding of the human being is his dy-
namic model of mental functioning-a model that posits that there are
forces in conflict within the individual, and that thought, emotion, and
behavior, both adaptive and psychopathological, are the resultant of
these conflicting forces. Furthermore-and this is important-these
forces exist at varying levels of awareness; some, indeed, are entirely
unconscious.
   The psychodynamics of an individual thus include the various un-
conscious and conscious forces, motives, and fears that operate within
him or her. The dynamic psychotherapies are therapies based upon this
dynamic model of mental functioning.
   So far, so good. Existential therapy, as I shall describe it, fits comforta-
bly in the category of the dynamic therapies. But what if we ask, Which
forces (and fears and motives) are in conflict? What is the content of this
internal conscious and unconscious struggle? It is at this juncture that
dynamic existential therapy parts company from the other dynamic
therapies. Existential therapy is based on a radically different view of
the specific forces, motives, and fears that interact in the individual.
   The precise nature of the deepest internal conflicts is never easy to
identify. The clinician working with a troubled patient is rarely able to
examine primal conflicts in pristine form. Instead, the patient harbors
an enormously complex set of concerns: the primary concerns are deep-
ly buried, encrusted with layer upon layer of repression, denial, dis-
placement, and symbolization. The clinical investigator must contend
with a clinical picture of many threads so matted together that disen-
tanglement is difficult. To identify the primary conflicts, one must use
many avenues of access-deep reflection, dreams, nightmares, flashes
6


 1 I Introduction
of profound experience and insight, psychotic utterances, and the
study of children. I shall, in time, explore these avenues, but for now a
stylized schematic presentation may be helpful. A brief review of three
contrasting views of the individual's prototypic intrapsychic conflict-
Freudian, neo-Freudian, and existential-illustrates by counterpoint
the existential view of psychodynamics.
FREUDIAN PSYCHODYNAMICS
   According to Freud, the child is governed by instinctual forces that
are innate and, like a fern frond, gradually unfurl through the psycho-
sexual developmental cycle. There are conflicts on several fronts: dual
instincts (ego instincts versus libidinal instincts or, in the second the-
ory, Eros versus Thanatos) oppose one another; the instincts collide
with the demands of the environment and, later, with the demands of
the internalized environment-the superego; the child is required to
negotiate between the inner press for immediate gratification and the
reality principle which demands delay of gratification. The instinctive-
ly driven individual is thus at war with a world that prevents satisfac-
tion of innate aggressive and sexual appetites.
NEO-FREUDIAN (INTERPERSONAL) PSYCHODYNAMICS
   The neo-Freudians-especially Harry Stack Sullivan, Karen Horney,
and Erich Fromm-present another view of the individual's basic con-
flict. The child, rather than being instinct-powered and prepro-
grammed, is instead a being who, aside from innate neutral qualities
like temperament and activity levels, is entirely shaped by cultural and
interpersonal environment. The child's basic need is for security-for
interpersonal acceptance. and a£Prov~l-and the quality of interaction
with security-providing significant adults determines his or her* char-
acter structure. The child, though not powered by instincts, nonethe-
less has great innate energy, curiosity, an innocence of the body, an in-
herent potential for growth, and a wish for exclusive possession of
loved adults. These attributes are not always consonant with the de-
mands of surrounding significant adults, and the core conflict is be-
tween these natural growth inclinations and the child's need for secu-
rity and approval. If a child is unfortunate enough to have parents so
caught up in their own neurotic struggles that they can neither provide
   • Throughout this book I have tried to avoid language with sexist connotations. Be-
cause linguistic convention lags behind social change, I have not always been successful.
                                                                                       7


                                                                  1 I Introduction
      security nor encourage autonomous growth, then severe conflict en-
      sues. In such a struggle, growth is always compromised for the sake of
      security.
      EXISTENTIAL PSYCHODYNAMICS
         The existential position emphasizes a different kind of basic conflict:
      neither a conflict with suppressed instinctual strivings nor one with
      internalized significant adults, but instead a conflict that flows from the in-
      dividual's confrontation with the givens of existence. And I mean by "gi-
      vens" of existence certain ultimate concerns, certain intrinsic proper-
      ties that are a part, and an inescapable part, of the human being's
      existence in the world.
         How does one discover the nature of these givens? In one sense the
   ~
      task is not difficult. The method is deep personal reflection. The condi-
      tions are simple: solitude, silence, time, and freedom from the every-
      day distractions with which each of us fills his or her experiential
      world. If we can brush away or "bracket" the everyday world, if we re-
      flect deeply upon our "situation" in the world, upon our existence, our
      boundaries, our possibilities, if we arrive at the ground that underlies
      all other ground, we invariably confront the givens of existence, the
      "deep structures," which I shall henceforth refer to as "ultimate con-
      cerns." This process of reflection is often catalyzed by certain urgent
      experiences. These "boundary" or "border" situations, as they are often
      referred to, include such experiences as a confrontation with one's own
      death, some major irreversible decision, or the collapse of some funda-
      mental meaning-providing schema.
         This book deals with four ultimate concerns: death, freedom, isolation, and
      meaninglessness. The individual's confrontation with each of these facts
      of life constitutes the content of the existential dynamic conflict.
     t   Death. ]The most obvious, the most easily apprehended ultimate
      concern is death. We exist now, but one day we shall cease to be. Death
      will come, and there is no escape from it. It is a terrible truth, and we
      respond to it with mortal terror. "Everything," in Spinoza's words,
      "endeavors to persist in its own being"; 3 and a core existential conflict
   [  is the tension between the awareness of the inevitability of death and
      the wish to continue to be.
       l Freedoi!J Another ultimate concern, a far less accessible one, is
C9    freedom. Ordinarily we think of freedom as an unequivocally positive
      concept. Throughout recorded history has not the human being
      yearned and striven for freedom? Yet freedom viewed from the per-
   r  spective of ultimate ground is riveted to dread. In its existential sense
      "freedom" refers to the absence of external structure. Contrary to ev-
      8
                                 ,_                        -------


  1 I Introduction
 eryday experience, the human being does not enter (and leave) a well-
structured universe that has an inherent design. Rather, the individual
 is entirely responsible for-that is, is the author of-his or her own
 world, life design, choices, and actions. "Freedom" in this sense, has a
 terrifying implication: it means that beneath us there is no ground-
 nothing, a void, an abyss. A key existential dynamic, then, is the clashl
 between our confrontation with groundlessness and our wish for                              J
 ground and structure.
  {Existential Isolat!oii] A third ultimate concern is isolation-not inter-
 personal isolation with its attendant loneliness, or intrapersonal isolation
(isolation from parts of oneself), but a fundamental isolation-an isola-
 tion both from creatures and from world-which cuts beneath other
 isolation. No matter how close each of us becomes to another, there re-
 mains a final, unbridgeable gap; each of us enters existence alone and
 must depart from it alone. The existential conflict is thus the tension E.V 'f5{c)l.
 between our awareness of our absolute isolation and our wish for con- c..o~l't-'¢1\ 7
 tact, for protection, our wish to be part of a larger whole.
                                                                                               .
   [Me.aninglessnesi) A fourth ultimate concern or given of existence is
meaninglessness. If we must die, if we constitute our own world, if
each is ultimately alone in an indifferent universe, then what meaning
does life have? Why do we live? How shall we live? If there is no pre-
ordained design for us, then each of us must construct our own mean-
ings in life. Yet can a meaning of one's own creation be sturdy enough
 to bear one's life? This existential dynamic conflict stems from the di-
 lemma of a meaning-seeking creature who is thrown into a universe
that has no meaning.
                                                                                             J
EXISTENTIAL PSYCHODYNAMICS: GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS
    "Existential psychodynamics" refers, thus, to these four givens, these
ultimate concerns, and to the conscious and unconscious fears and mo-
tives spawned by each. The dynamic existential approach retains the
basic dynamic structure outlined by Freud but radically alters the con-
tent. The old formula of:
             DRIVE --+ ANXIETY --+ DEFENSE MECHANISM*
is replaced by
    *Where the anxiety is a signal of danger-that is, if instinctual drives are permitted
free rein, the organism is endangered, since the ego will be overwhelmed and retaliatory
punishment (castration-abandonment) is inevitable; and the defense mechanisms restrict
direct drive gratification but afford indirect expression-that is, in displaced, sublimated,
or symbolic form.
                                                                                          9


                                                                     1 I Introduction
  AWARENESS OF
  ULTIMATE CONCERN ----. ANXIETY ----. DEFENSE MECHANISM•
Both formulas assume that anxiety is the fuel of psychopathology; that
psychic operations, some conscious and some unconscious, evolve to
deal with anxiety; that these psychic operations (defense mechanisms)
constitute psychopathology; and that, though they provide safety, they
invariably restrict growth and experience. A major difference between
these two dynamic approaches is that Freud's sequence begins with
"drive," whereas an existential framework begins with awareness and
fear. As Otto Rank knew/ the therapist has far more leverage if he or
she views the individual primarily as a fearful, suffering being rather
than as an instinctually driven one.
    These four ultimate concerns-death, freedom, isolation, and mean-
 inglessness-constitute the corpus of existential psychodynamics. They
 play an extraordinarily important role at every level of individual psy-
chic organization and have enormous relevance to clinical work. They
also provide a central organizing principle; the four sections of this
book will focus on each ultimate concern in turn and explore the philo-
 sophical, psychopathological, and therapeutic implications of each.
 EXISTENTIAL PSYCHODYNAMICS: THE QUESTION OF DEPTH
   Another major difference between existential dynamics and Freud-
ian and neo-Freudian dynamics involves the definition of "deep." To
 Freud, e~loration always meant excavation. With the deliberateness
and patience of an archaeologist he scraped away at the many-layered
 psyche until he reached bedrock, a layer of fundamental conflicts that
 were the psychological residue of the earliest events in the life of the
 individual. Deepest conflict meant earliest conflict. Freud's psychody-
 namics are thus developmentally based, and "fundamental" or "pri-
 mary" are to be grasped chronologically: each is synonymous with
 "first." Accordingly, the "fundamental" sources of anxiety, for exam-
 ple, are considered to be the earliest psychosexual calamities: separa-
 tion and castration.
    Existential dynamics are not wedded to a developmental model.
 There is no compelling reason to assume that "fundamental" (that is,
    * Where the anxiety springs from fear of death, groundlessness, isolation, and mean-
inglessness, and the defense mechanisms are of two types: (1) conventional mechanisms of
defense, which have been described thoroughly by Freud, Anna Freud,' and Sullivan,'
and which defend the individual generally against anxiety regardless of its source; and
(2) specific defenses, to be discussed shortly, which arise to serve the specific function of
coping with each of the primary existential fears.
10


1 I Introduction
important, basic) and "first" (that is, chronologically first) are identical
concepts. To explore deeply from an existential perspective does not
mean that one explores the past; rather, it means that one brushes away
everyday concerns and thinks deeply about one's existential situation.
It means to think outside of time, to think about the relationship be-
tween one's feet and the ground beneath one, between one's con-
sciousness and the space around one; it means to think not about the
way one came to be the way one is, but that one is. The past-that is,
one's memory of the past-is important insofar as it is part of one's cur-
rent existence and has contributed to one's current mode of facing
one's ultimate concerns; but it is, as I shall discuss later, not the most
rewarding area for therapeutic exploration. The future-becoming-pre-
sent is the primary tense of existential therapy.
   This distinction does not mean that one cannot explore existential
factors in a developmental framework (in fact, chapter 3 explores in
depth the development of the child's concept of death); but it does
mean that development issues are not germane when an individual
asks, "At this moment, at the deepest levels of my being, what are the
most fundamental sources of dread?" The individual's earliest experi-
ences, though undeniably important in life, do not provide the answer
to this fundamental question. In fact, the residue of earliest life creates
a biological static that serves to obscure the answer. The answer to the
inquiry is transpersonal. It is an answer that cuts beneath any individ-
ual's personal life history. It is an answer that applies to every person:
it belongs to the human being's "situation" in the world.
   This distinction between the developmental, dynamic, analytic mod-
el and the immediate, ahistorical, existential one has more than theo-
retical interest: as I shall discuss in later chapters, it has profound im-
plications for the technique of the therapist.
    The Existential Orientation: Strange But Oddly Familiar
A great deal of my material on the ultimate concerns will appear
strange yet, in an odd way, familiar to the clinician. The material will
appear strange because the existential approach cuts across common
categories and clusters clinical observations in a novel manner. Fur-
thermore, much of the vocabulary is different. Even if I avoid the jar-
gon of the professional philosopher and use common-sense terms to
describe existential concepts, the clinician will find the language psy-
chologically alien. Where is the psychotherapy lexicon that contains
                                                                          11


                                                                     1 I Introduction
such terms as "choice," "responsibility," "freedom," "existential isola-
tion," "mortality," "purpose in life," "willing"? The medical library
computers snickered at me when I requested literature searches in
these areas.
   Yet the clinician will find in them much that is familiar. I believe
that the experienced clinician often operates implicitly within an exis-
tential framework: "in his bones" he appreciates a patient's concerns
and responds accordingly. That response is what I meant earlier by the
crucial "throw-ins." A major task of this book is to shift the therapist's
focus, to attend carefully to these vital concerns and to the therapeutic
transactions that occur on the periphery of formal therapy, and to place
them where they belong-in the center of the therapeutic arena.
   Another familiar note is that the major existential concerns have
been recognized and discussed since the beginning of written thought,
and that their primacy has been recognized by an unbroken stream of
philosophers, theologians, and poets. That fact may offend our sense of
pride in modernism, our sense of an eternal spiral of progress; but from
another perspective, we may feel reassured to travel a well-worn path
trailing back into time, hewed by the wisest and the most thoughtful of
individuals.
   These existential sources of dread are familiar, too, in that they are
the experience of the therapist as Everyman; they are by no means the
exclusive province of the psychologically troubled individual. Repeat-
edly, I shall stress that they are part of the human condition. How
then, one may ask, can a theory of psychopathology• rest on factors
that are experienced by every individual? The answer, of course, is that
each person experiences the stress of the human condition in highly
individualized fashion. In this regard the existential model does not
differ significantly from every major competing theory. Every individ-
ual passes through certain developmental stages, each with its own at-
tendant anxiety. Everyone passes through the oedipal conflict, the dis-
turbing emergence of aggressive and sexual feelings, castration anxiety
(for males at least), the pain of individuation and separation, and many
other severe developmental challenges. The only model of psycho-
pathology that does not rest on universally experienced factors is one
based on acute trauma. However, traumatic neuroses are rare. The
overwhelming majority of patients suffer from stress that to differing
degrees is part of every person's experience.
   * In this discussion, as elsewhere in this text, I refer to psychologically based distur-
 bance, not to the major psychoses with a fundamental biochemical origin.
12


1 I Introduction
   In fact, only the universality of human suffering can account for the
common observation that patienthood is ubiquitous. Andre Malraux, to
cite one such observation, once asked a parish priest who had been tak-
ing confession for fifty years, what he had learned about mankind. The
priest replied, "First of all, people are much more unhappy than one]
thinks ... and then the fundamental fact is that there is no such thing
as a grown up person." 7 Often it is only external circumstances that re-
                                                                               *
sult in one person, and not another, being labeled a patient: for exam-
ple, financial resources, availability of psychotherapists, personal and
cultural attitudes toward therapy, or choice of profession-the majority
of psychotherapists become themselves bona fide patients. The univer-
sality of stress is one of the major reasons that scholars encounter such
difficulty when attempting to define and describe normality: the dif-
ference between normality and pathology is quantitative, not
                                                                              J'7
                                                                                 ·
qualitative.
   The contemporary model that seems most consistent with the evi-
dence is analogous to a model in physical medicine that suggests that
infectious disease is not simply a result of a bacterial or a viral agent in-
vading an undefended body. Rather, disease is a result of a ~b­
rium between the noxious agent and host resistance. In other words,
noxious agents exist within the body at all times-just as stresses, in-
separable from living, confront all individuals. Whether an individual
develops clinical disease depends on the body's resistance (that is, such
factors as immunological system, nutrition, and fatigue) to the agent:
when resistance is lowered, disease develops, even though the toxicity
and the virility of the noxious agent are unchanged. Thus, all human
beings are in a quandary, but some are unable to cope with it: psycho-
pathology depends not merely on the presence or the absence of stress
but on the interaction between ubiquitous stress and the individual's
mechanisms of defense.
   The claim that the ultimate existential concerns never arise in ther-
apy is entirely a function of a therapist's selective inattention: a listener
tuned into the proper channel finds explicit and abundant material. A
therapist may choose, however, not to attend to the existential ultimate
concerns precisely because they are universal experiences, and there-
fore nothing constructive can come from exploring them. Indeed, I
have often noted in clinical work that, when existential concerns are
broached, the therapist and the patient are intensely energized for a
short while; but soon the discussion becomes desultory, and the patient
and therapist seem to say tacitly, "Well that's life, isn't it! Let's move on
to something neurotic, something we can do something about!"
                                                                           13


                                                                               1 I Introduction
   Other therapists veer away from dealing with existential concerns
not only because these concerns are universal but because they are too
terrible to face. After all, neurotic patients (and therapists, too) have
enough to worry about without adding such cheery items as death and
meaninglessness. Such therapists believe that existential issues are best
ignored, since there are only two ways to deal with the brutal existen-
tial facts of life-anxious truth or denial-and either is unpalatable.
Cervantes voiced this problem wheillUS immortal Don said, "Which
would you have,~adness or foolish sanity?"
   An existential t erapeutic position, as I shall attempt to demonstrate
in later chapters, rejects this dilemma.~does not lead to mad-
ness, nor denial to sanity: the confrontation with the givens of exis-
tMe is painful but ultimately healing. Good therapeuhc work is al-
ways coupled with reality fesiTng and the search for personal
enlightenment; the therapist who decides that certain aspects of reality
and truth are to be eschewed is on treacherous ground. Thomas
Hardy's comment, "if a way to the Better there be, it exacts a full look
at the Worst,'' 8 is a good frame for the therapeutic approach I shall
describe.
              T~ 6on~ 'Ll'-'.skt.\-\£.,\ •S~V~l "<~ P"'<-esHJ ._,,:n,..--}
               C-O'-'"~"'~""'-~ 1\- '""'"} ft-JI..,\\. I J_J, .. t or J~ \tk I"'..J~~:tJJ,
              WlS.I:x>"",   "''f J~.R"J-,.~ I r........ w  c::. ,..,(...,.<-~ ~ocl-vU~"t T~
              (-v;,A•.. I IJJvV     ~~       ..k_,l':>    '\I;'Nw-Jt~        •
                The Field of Existential Psychotherapy
Existential psychotherapy is rather much a homeless waif. It does not
really "belong" anywhere. It has no homestead, no formal school, no
institution; it is not welcomed into the better academic neighborhoods.
It has no formal society, no robust journal (a few sickly offspring were
carried away in their infancy), no stable family, no paterfamilias. It
does, however, have a genealogy, a few scattered cousins, and friends
of the family, some in the old country, some in America.
EXISTENTIAL PHILOSOPHY: THE ANCESTRAL HOME
   "Existentialism is not easily definable." So begins the discussion of
existential philosphy in philosophy's major contemporary encyclope-
dia.9 Most other reference works begin in similar fashion and under-
score the fact that two philosophers both labeled "existential" may dis-
agree on every cardinal point (aside from their shared aversion to
being so labeled). Most philosophical texts resolve the problem of defi-
nition by listing a number of themes relating to existence (for example,
14


1 I Introduction
being,.c_~ice,    freedom, death, isola!iQ.&.-abstJrdity)_, and by proclaiming
that an existential philosopher is one whose work is dedicated to ex-
ploring them. (This is, of course, the strategy I use to identify the field
of existential psychotherapy).
  There is an existential "tradition" in philosophy and a formal exis-
tential "school" of philosophy. Obviously the existential tradition is
ageless. What great thinker has not at some point in both work and life
turned his or her attention to life and death issues? The formal school
of existential philosophy, however, has a clearly demarcated begin-
ning. Some trace it to a Sunday afternoon in 1834, when a young Dane
sat in a cafe smoking a cigar and mused upon the fact that he was on
his way to becoming an old man without having made a contribution
to the world. He thought about his many successful friends:
       ... benefactors of the age who know how to benefit mankind by making
       life easier and easier, some by railways, others by omnibuses and steam-
       boats, others by telegraph, others by easily apprehended compendiums
      and short recitals of everything worth knowing, and finally the true
      benefactors of the age who by virtue of thought make spiritual existence
      systematically easier and easier. 10
   His cigar burned out. The young Dane, Soren Kierkegaard, lit an-
other and continued musing. Suddenly there flashed in his mind this
thought:
      You must do something but inasmuch as with your limited capacities it
      will be impossible to make anything easier than it has become, you
       must, with the same humanitarian enthusiasm as the others, undertake
      to make something harder."
He reasoned that when all combine to make everything easier, then
there is a danger that easiness will be excessive. Perhaps someone is
needed to make things difficult again. It occurred to him that he had
discovered his destiny: he was to go in search of difficulties-like a
new SocratesY And which difficulties? They were not hard to find. He
had only to consider his own situation in existence, his own dread, his
choices, his possibilities and limitations.
  Kierkegaard devoted the remainder of his short life to exploring his
existential situation and during the 1840s published several important
existential treatises. His work remained untranslated for many years
and exerted little influence until after the First World War, when it
found fertile soil and was taken up by Martin Heidegger and Karl
Jaspers.
  The relation of existential therapy to the existential school of philos-
                                                                             15


                                                             1 I Introduction
   ophy is much like that of clinical pharmacotherapy to biochemical
   bench research. I shall frequently draw upon philosophical works to
   explicate, corroborate, or illustrate some of the clinical issues; but it is
   not my intention (nor within my range of scholarship) to discuss in a
   comprehensive fashion the works of any philosopher or the major te-
   nets of existential philosophy. This is a book for clinicians, and I mean
   it to be clinically useful. My excursions into philosophy will be brief
   and pragmatic; I shall limit myself to those domains that offer leverage
   in clinical work. I cannot blame the professional philosopher who may
\. liken me to the Y.i.king raider who grabbed gemstones while leaving
L_ behind their intricate and precious settings.                    --
      As the educahon"'fthe greatmajority of psychotherapists includes
   little or no emphasis on philosophy, I shall not assume any philosophi-
   cal background in my readers. When I do draw upon philosophical
   texts, I shall attempt to do so in a straightforward, jargon-free fashion-
   not an easy task, incidentally, since professional existential philos-
   ophers surpass even psychoanalytic theoreticians in the use of turbid,
   convoluted language. The single most important philosophical text in
   the field, Heidegger's Being and Time, stands alone as the undisputed
   champion of linguistic obfuscation.
      I have never understood the reason for the impenetrable deep-
   sounding language. The basic existential concepts themselves are not
   complex, they do not need to be uncoded and meticulously analyzed as
   much as they need to be uncovered. Every person, at some point in life,
   enters a "brown study" and has some traffic with existential ultimate
   concerns. What is required is not formal explication: the task of the
   philosopher, and of the therapist as well, is to de-repress, to reacquaint
   the individual with something he or she has known all along. This is
   precisely the reason that many of the leading existential thinkers (for
   example, Jean-Paul Sartre, Albert Camus, Miguel de Unamuno, Martin
   Buber) prefer literary exposition rather than formal philosophical argu-
   ment. Above all, the philosopher and the therapist must encourage the
   individual to look within and to attend to his or her existential situa-
   tion.
   THE EXISTENTIAL ANALYSTS: OLD COUNTRY COUSINS
      A number of European psychiatrists took issue with many of the ba-
   sic tenets of Freud's psychoanalytic approach. They objected to Freud's
   model of psychic functioning, to his efforts to understand the human
   being by way of an energy-conservation schema borrowed from the
   physical sciences, and suggested that such an approach resulted in an
   inadequate view of the human being. If one applies one schema to ex-
   16


1 I Introduction
plain all individuals, they argued, one misses the unique experience of
the particular person. They objected to Freud's reductionism (that is,
tracing all human behavior to a few basic drives), to his materialism
(that is, explaining the higher in terms of the lower), and to his deter-
minism (that is, the belief that all mental functioning is caused by
identifiable factors already in existence).
   The various existential analysts agreed on one fundamental proce-
dural point: the analyst must approach the patient phenomenological-
ly; that is, he or she must enter the patient's experiential world and lis-
ten to the phenomena of that world without the presuppositions that
distort understanding. As Ludwig Binswanger, one of the best known
of the existential analysts, said, "There is not one space and time only,
but as many spaces and times as there are subjects." 13
   Aside from their reaction against Freud's mechanistic, deterministic
model of the mind and their assumption of a phenomenological ap-
proach in therapy, the existential analysts have little in common and
have never been regarded as a cohesive ideological school. These
thinkers-who include Ludwig Binswanger, Melard Boss, Eugene Min-
kowsky, V. E. Gebsattel, Roland Kuhn, G. Caruso, F. T. Buytendijk, G.
Bally, and Viktor Frankl-were almost entirely unknown to the Ameri-
can psychotherapeutic community until Rollo May's highly influential
1958 book Existence-and especially his introductory essay 14 -intro-
duced their work into this country.
   However, today, more than twenty years after May's book, it is strik-
ing that these figures exert little influence upon American psycho-
therapeutic practice. They mean little more than the unknown faces in
faded daguerreotypes in the family photo album. In part, this neglect
has resulted from a language barrier: aside from some of the writings
of Binswanger, Boss, and Frankl, these philosophers have been seldom
translated. For the most part, however, it is due to the abstruse nature
of their writing: they are steeped in a Continental philosophical Welt-
anschauung far out of synchrony with the American pragmatic tradition
in therapy. Thus, the Continental existential analysts remain scattered
and, for the most part, lost cousins of the existential therapy approach I
intend to describe. I do not draw heavily from them here, with the sin-
gle exception of Viktor Frankl, an eminently pragmatic thinker, whose
work has been widely translated.
HUMANISTIC PSYCHOLOGISTS: FLASHY AMERICAN COUSINS
   The European existential analytic trend arose both from a desire to
apply philosophical concepts to a clinical study of the person and as a
reaction to Freud's model of man. In the United States an analogous
                                                                        17


                                                               1 I Introduction
movement began to rumble in the late 1950s, it surfaced and coalesced
in the 1960s, and it rode madly off in all directions at once in the 1970s.
   Academic psychology had by the 1950s been long dominated by two
major ideological schools. The first-and, by far, the longest domi-
nant-was a scientific positivistic behaviorism; the second was Freud-
ian psychoanalysis. A minor voice first heard in the late 1930s and
1940s belonged to abnormal and social psychologists who coexisted un-
comfortably in the experimental psychology bastions. Gradually those
personality theorists (for example, Gordon Allport, Henry Murray, and
Gardner Murphy and, later, George Kelly, Abraham Maslow, Carl Rog-
ers, and Rollo May) grew uncomfortable with the limitations of both
the behavioristic and the analytic schools. They felt that both of these
ideological approaches to the person excluded some of the most impor-
tant qualities that make the human being human-for example, choice,
values, love, creativity, self-awareness, human potential. In 1950 they
formally established a new ideological school which they labeled "hu-
manistic psychology." Humanistic psychology, sometimes referred to
as the "third force" in psychology (after behaviorism and Freudian
analytic psychology), became a robust organization with growing
membership rolls and an annual convention attended by thousands of
mental health professionals. In 1961 the American Association of Hu-
manistic Psychology founded the Journal of Humanistic Psychology,
which has included on its editorial board such well-known figures as
Carl Rogers, Rollo May, Lewis Mumford, Kurt Goldstein, Charlotte
Buhler, Abraham Maslow, Aldous Huxley, and James Bugental.
   The fledgling organization made some early attempts to define itself.
In 1962 it formally stated:
       Humanistic Psychology is primarily concerned with those human capac-
       ities and potentialities that have little or no systematic place, either in
       positivist or behaviorist theory or in classical psychoanalytic theory: e.g.,
       love, creativity, self, growth, organism, basic need-gratification, self-ac-
       tualization, higher values, being, becoming, spontaneity, play, humor,
       affection, naturalness, warmth, ego-transcendence, objectivity, auton-
       omy, responsibility, meaning, fairplay, transcendental experience, psy-
       chological health, and related concepts. 15
   In 1963 the association's president, James Bugental, suggested five
basic postulates:
    1. Man, as man, supersedes the sum of his parts (that is, man cannot be under-
       stood from a scientific study of part-functions.)
    2. Man has his being in a human context (that is, man cannot be understood by
       part-functions which ignore interpersonal experience.)
18


1 I Introduction
    3. Man is aware (and cannot be understood by a psychology which fails to
        recognize man's continuous, many-layered self-awareness.)
    4. Man has choice (man is not a bystander to his existence; he creates his
        own experience.)
    5. Man is intentional• (man points to the future; he has purpose, values and
        meaning.) 16
   Much in these early manifestos-antideterminism, the emphasis on
freedom, choice, purpose, values, responsibility, the dedication to ap-
preciating the unique experiential world of each individual-is of
great importance in the existential frame of reference I present in this
book. But by no means is the American field of humanistic psychology
synonymous with the Continental existential tradition; there is a fun-
damental difference in accent. The existential tradition in Europe has
always emphasized human limitations and the tragic dimensions of ex-
istence. Perhaps it has done so because Europeans have had a greater
familiarity with geographic and ethnic confinement, with war, death,
and uncertain existence. The United States (and the humanistic psy-
chology it spawned) bathed in a Zeitgeist of expansiveness, optimism,
limitless horizons, and pragmatism. Accordingly, the imported form of
existential thought ha., been systematically altered. Each of the basic te-
nets has a distinct New World accent. The European focus is on limits,
on facing and taking into oneself the anxiety of uncertainty and non-
                                                                                          J
being. The humanistic psychologists, on the other hand, speak less                    ou·
limits and contingency than of ~elopment of potential, less of accep-
tance than of awareness, less of anxiety than of peak experiences and
oceanic oneness, less of life meaning than of self-realization, less of
apartness and basic isolation than of I-Thou and encounter.
   In the 1960s the counterculture with its attendant social phenom-
ena-such as the free speech movement, the flower children, the drug
culture, the human-potentialists, the sexual revolution-engulfed the
humanistic psychological movement. Soon the association conventions
developed aspects of a carnival. The big tent of humanist psychology
was, if nothing else, generous and soon included a bewildering num-
ber of schools barely able to converse with one another even in an exis-
 tential Esperanto. Gestalt therapy, transpersonal therapy, encounter
groups, holistic medicine, psychosynthesis, Sufi, and many, many oth-
ers pranced into the arena. The new trends have value orientations that
bear significant implications for psychotherapy. There is an emphasis
   *To be distinguished from the technical philosophical use of intentionality which re-
fers to the phenomenon that consciousness is always directed toward some object: that is,
consciousness is consciousness of something.
                                                                                     19


                                                        1 I Introduction
on hedonism ("if it feels good, do it"), on anti-intellectualism (which
considers any cognitive approach as "mind-fucking"), on individual
fulfillment ("doing your own thing," "peak experiences"), and on self-
actualization (a belief in human perfectibility is common to most hu-
manistic psychologists, with the major exception of Rollo May, who is
more deeply grounded in the existential philosophical tradition).
   These proliferating trends, especially the anti-intellectual ones, soon
effected a divorce between humanistic psychology and the academic
community. Humanistic psychologists in established academic posi-
tions felt uneasy about the company they were keeping and gradually
disaffiliated themselves. Fritz Perls, himself far from an advocate of
discipline, expressed great concern about the "turner-oners," the "any-
thing goes," the "instant sensory awareness" approach, 17 and eventual-
ly the three figures who supplied humanistic psychology with its ini-
tial intellectual leadership-May, Rogers, and Maslow-grew deeply
ambivalent about these irrational trends and gradually decreased their
active sponsorship.
   Existential psychotherapy, thus, has a hazy relationship with human-
istic psychology. They share many basic tenets, however, and many hu-
manistic psychologists have an existential orientation. Among them,
Maslow, Perls, Bugental, Buhler, and especially Rollo May will be cited
frequent! y in this text.
HUMANISTIC PSYCHOANALYSTS: FRIENDS OF THE FAMILY
   There remains a group of relatives whom I shall refer to as "human-
istic psychoanalysts," and who split off early from the genealogical
branches I have described. Though they never considered themselves a
clan, they closely parallel one another in their work. The major voices
in this group-Otto Rank, Karen Horney, Erich Fromm, and Helmuth
Kaiser-were all trained in the European Freudian psychoanalytic tra-
dition but emigrated to America; and all, with the exception of Rank,
made their major contributions while immersed in the American intel-
lectual community. Each objected to Freud's instinct-powered model of
human behavior, and each suggested important correctives. Though
the work of each was far-ranging, each, for a period of time, turned his
or her attention to some aspect of existential therapy. Rank, whose con-
tributions have been brilliantly augmented by latter-day interpreter Er-
nest Becker, emphasized the importance of the will and of death anxi-
ety; Horney, the crucial role of the future as an influencer of behavior
(the individual is motivated by purpose, ideals, and goals rather than
shaped and determined by past events); Fromm has masterfully illumi-
20


1 I Introduction
nated the role and fear of freedom in behavior; while Kaiser has dealtj
with responsibility and isolation.
   In addition to these major branches of philosophers, humanistic psy-
chologists, and humanistically oriented psychoanalysts, the genealogi-
cal tree of existential therapy contains another important segment con-
stituted by the great writers who, no less fully than their professional
brethren, explored and explicated existential issues. Thus, the voices of
Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Kafka, Sartre, Camus, and many other distin-
guished teachers will be heard frequently throughout this book. Great
literature survives, as Freud pointed out in his discussion of Oedipus
Rex/8 because something in the reader leaps out to embrace its truth.
The truth of fictional characters moves us because it is our own truth.
Furthermore, great works of literature teach us about ourselves because
they are scorchingly honest, as honest as any clinical data: the great
novelist, however his or her personality may be split among many
characters, is ultimately highly self-revelatory. Thornton Wilder once
wrote: "If Queen Elizabeth or Frederick the Great or Ernest Heming-
way were to read their biographies, they would exclaim, 'Ah-my se-
cret is still safe!' But if Natasha Rostov were to read War and Peace she
would cry out, as she covered her face with her hands, 'How did he
know? How did he know?' " 19
         Existential Therapy and the Academic Community
Earlier I likened existential therapy to a homeless waif who was not
permitted into the better academic neighborhoods. The lack of aca-
demic support from academic psychiatry and psychology has signifi-
cant implications for the field of existential therapy, since academically
dominated institutions control all the vital supply routes that influence
the development of the clinical disciplines: the training of clinicians
and academicians, research funding, licensure, and journal publication.
   It is worth taking a moment to consider why the existential approach
is so quarantined by the academic establishment. The answer centers
primarily on the issue of the basis of knowledge-that is, how do we
know what we know? Academic psychiatry and psychology, grounded
in a positivist tradition, value empirical research as the method of vali-
dating knowledge.
                                                                        21


                                                           1 I Introduction
   Consider the typical career of the academician (and I speak not only
from observation but from my own twenty-year academic career): the
young lecturer or assistant professor is hired because he or she displays
aptitude and motivation for empirical research, and later is rewarded
and promoted for carefully and methodically performed research. The
crucial tenure decision is made on the basis of the amount of empirical
research published in refereed scientific journals. Other factors, such as
teaching skills or nonempirical books, book chapters, and essays, are
given decidedly secondary consideration.
   It is extraordinarily difficult for a scholar to carve out an academic ca-
reer based upon an empirical investigation of existential issues. The ba-
sic tenets of existential therapy are such that empirical research meth-
ods are often inapplicable or inappropriate. For example, the empirical
research method requires that the investigator study a complex organ-
ism by breaking it down into its component parts, each simple enough
to permit empirical investigation. Yet this fundamental principle ne-
gates a basic existential principle. A story told by Viktor Frankl is
illustrative. 20
   Two neighbors were involved in a bitter dispute. One claimed that
the other's cat had eaten his butter and, accordingly, demanded com-
pensation. Unable to resolve the problem, the two, carrying the ac-
cused cat, sought out the village wise man for a judgment. The wise
man asked the accuser, "How much butter did the cat eat"? "Ten
pounds" was the response. The wise man placed the cat on the scale. Lo
and behold! it weighed exactly ten pounds. "Mirabile dictu!" he pro-
claimed. "Here we have the butter. But where is the cat?"
   Where is the cat? All the parts taken together do not reconstruct the
creature. A fundamental humanistic credo is that "man is greater than
the sum of his parts." No matter how carefully one understands the
composite parts of the mind-for example, the conscious and the un-
conscious, the superego, the ego, and the id-one still does not grasp
the central vital agency, the person whose unconscious (or superego or
id or ego) it is. Furthermore, the empirical approach never helps one to
learn the meaning of this psychic structure to the person who possesses
it. Meaning can never be obtained from a study of component parts, be-
cause meaning is never caused; it is created by a person who is supraor-
dinate to all his parts.
   But there is in the existential approach a problem for empirical re-
search even more fundamental than the one of "Where is the cat?"
Rollo May alluded to it when he defined existentialism as "the endeav-
or to understand man by cutting below the cleavage between subject
22


1 I Introduction
and object which has bedeviled Western thought and science since
shortly after the Renaissance." 21 The "cleavage between subject and ob-
ject" -let us take a closer look at that. The existential position chal-
lenges the traditional Cartesian view of a world full of objects and of
subjects who perceive those objects. Obviously, this is the basic premise
of the scientific method: there are objects with a finite set of properties
that can be understood through objective investigation. The existential
position cuts below this subject-object cleavage and regards the person
not as a subject who can, under the proper circumstances, perceive ex-
ternal reality but as a consciousness who participates in the construc-
tion of reality. To emphasize this point, Heidegger always spoke of the
human being as dasein. Da ("there") refers to the fact that the person is
there, is a constituted object (an "empirical ego"), but at the same time
constitutes the world (that is, is a "transcendental ego"). Dasein is at
once the meaning giver and the known. Each dasein therefore consti-
tutes its own world; to study all beings with some standard instrument
as though they inhabited the same objective world is to introduce
monumental error into one's observations.
   It is important to keep in mind, however, that the limitations of em-
pirical psychotherapy research are not confined to an existential orien-
tation in therapy; it is only that they are more explicit in the existential
approach. Insofar as therapy is a deeply personal, human experience,
the empirical study of psychotherapy of any ideological school will
contain errors and be of limited value. It is common knowledge that
psychotherapy research has had, in its thirty-year history, little impact
upon the practice of therapy. In fact, as Carl Rogers, the founding fa-
ther of empirical psychotherapy research, sadly noted, not even psy-
chotherapy researchers take their research findings seriously enough
to alter their approach to psychotherapy. 22
   It is also common knowledge that the great majority of clinicians
stop doing empirical research once they finish their dissertation or
earn tenure. If empirical research is a valid truth-seeking, truth-finding
endeavor, why do psychologists and psychiatrists, once they have ful-
filled academic requirements, put away their tables of random numbers
for good? I believe that as the clinician gains maturity, he or she gradu-
ally begins to appreciate that there are staggering problems inherent in
an empirical study of psychotherapy.
   A personal experience may be illustrative. Several years ago two col-
leagues and I conducted a large research project on the process and the
outcome of encounter groups. We published the results in a book, En-
counter Groups: First Facts/3 which has been at once hailed as a bench-
                                                                         23


                                                         1 I Introduction
mark for precision in clinical work and attacked vociferously by many
humanistic psychologists. In fact, an issue of the afore-mentioned Jour-
nal of Humanistic Psychology was devoted to a vigorous attack on this
work. My two colleagues wrote robust and effective replies to the cri-
tiques, but I declined to do so. For one thing, I was entirely occupied in
writing my present book. At a deeper level I had doubts about the
meaning of our research-not for the reasons under public attack but
for something else: I could not believe that the true experience of the
participants was adequately described by our highly technical, comput-
erized statistical approach. One finding in the methodological center of
the work 24 particularly troubled me: we had used an enormous battery
of psychological instruments to assess how much each encounter-
group participant had changed. Outcome measures were taken from
four different perspectives: (I) from the participant himself, (2) from
the group leader, (3) from the participant's co-members, (4) from the
participant's social network. The correlation between these four per-
spectives of change was zero! In other words, there was zero-order
agreement between the various sources of information about who had
changed and how much they had changed.
   Now, of course, there are statistical ways to "handle" this finding,
but the fact remains that outcome evaluation is highly relative and de-
pends heavily on the source of information. Nor is this a problem con-
fined to this project: it plagues every psychotherapy outcome study.
The more methods used to assess outcome, the less certain is the re-
searcher of his results!
   How do researchers deal with this problem? One method is to in-
crease reliability by asking fewer questions and to rely upon a single
source of data. Another common method is to steer clear of "soft," or
subjective, criteria and measure only objective criteria, such as amount
of alcohol consumed, the number of times one spouse interrupts the
other in some given period of time, the number of bites of food taken,
galvanic skin response, or the size of penile tumescence while looking
at slides of naked youths~ut woe to the researcher who tries to mea-
sure the important factors, such as ability to love or care for another,
zest in life, purposefulness, generosity, exuberance, autonomy, sponta-
neity, humor, courage, or engagement in life. Again and again one en-
counters a basic fact of life in psychotherapy research: the precision of
the result is directly proportional to the triviality of the variables stud-
ied. A strange type of science!
   What is the alternative? The proper method of understanding the in-
ner world of another individual is the "phenomenological" one, to go
24


           1 I Introduction
           directly to the phenomena themselves, to encounter the other without
           "standardized" instruments and presuppositions. So far as possible one
           must "bracket" one's own world perspective and enter the experiential
           world of the other. Such an approach to knowing another person is
           eminently feasible in psychotherapy: every good therapist tries to re-
                                                                                       J
           late to the patient in this manner. That is what is meant by empathy.l
           presence, genuine listening, non-judgmental acceptance, or ~;"attitude
           of "disciplined nai'vety"-to use May's felicitous phrase. 25 Existential
           therapists have always urged that the therapist attempt to understand
           the private world of the patient rather than to focus on the way the pa-
           tient has deviated from -~orms." But this phenomenological ap-
           proach, which by definition is nonempirical, raises staggering and as
           yet unsolved problems for the researcher who struggles to achieve
           high scientific standards in his or her work.
              In spite of these reservations, my professional training has com-
           pelled me to consider the extant research for each of the four basic exis-
           tential concerns-death, freedom, isolation, and meaninglessness.
           And, of course, careful research can shed light on several important
           areas of inquiry. For example, research can tell us how frequently pa-
           tients are explicitly concerned with existential issues or how frequently
           therapists perceive these concerns.
              For the many existential topics that have never been explicitly stud-
           ied by researchers, I have examined research in tangential areas which
        J  may possibly bear upon the issue. For example, chapter 6 discusses "lo-
           cus of control" research because it is relevant to the areas of responsi-
        .~ bility and willing.
      0
.......       Other topics do not, for reasons discussed, permit empirical research .
           Researchers have accordingly selected some part-problems that are
           more available for study. For example, as we shall see, there exist many
           "death anxiety" scales which study the phenomenon of dread, but in
           such a superficial and norm-based manner as to offer little illumina-
           tion. I am reminded of the story of the man searching at night for a lost
           key, not in the dark alley where he dropped it but under a lamppost
           where the light was better. I cite this part-problem research with ap-
           propriate caveats.
              There are still other domains where knowledge must remain intu-
           itive. Certain truths of existence are so clear and sure that logical argu-
           ment or empirical research corroboration seems highly gratuitous. Karl
           Lashley, the neuropsychologist, is said to have once commented: "If
           you teach an airedale to play the violin, you don't need a string quartet
           to prove it."
                                                                                    25


                                                          1 I Introduction
  I have attempted to write this book in a style sufficiently lucid and
free of jargon that it will be intelligible to the lay reader. However, the
primary audience for whom I intend it is the student and the practicing
psychotherapist. It is important to note that, even though I assume for
my reader no formal philosophical education, I do assume some clini-
cal background. I do not mean this to be a "first" or a complete psycho-
therapy text but expect the reader to be familiar with conventional
clinical explanatory systems. Hence, when I describe clinical phenom-
ena from an existential frame of reference, I do not always offer alter-
nate modes of explanation for them. My task, as I view it, is to describe
a coherent psychotherapy approach based on existential concerns
which gives an explicit place to the procedures that the majority of
therapists employ implicitly.
   I do not pretend to describe the theory of psychopathology and psy-
chotherapy. Instead, I present a paradigm, a psychological construct,
that offers the clinician a system of explanation-a system that permits
him or her to make sense out of a large array of clinical data and to for-
mulate a systematic strategy of psychotherapy. It is a paradigm that has
considerable explanatory power; it is parsimonious (that is, it rests on
relatively few basic assumptions) and it is accessible (that is, the as-
sumptions rest on experiences that may be intuitively perceived by ev-
ery introspective individual). Furthermore, it is a humanistically based
paradigm, consonant with the deeply human nature of the therapeutic
enterprise.
   But it is a paradigm, not the paradigm-useful for some patients, not
for all patients; employable by some therapists, not by all therapists.
The existential orientation is one clinical approach among other ap-
proaches. It repatterns clinical data but, like other paradigms, has no
exclusive hegemony and is not capable of explaining all behavior. The
human being has too much complexity and possibility to permit that it
do so.
   Existence is inexorably free and, thus, uncertain. Cultural institu-
tions and psychological constructs often obscure this state of affairs,
but confrontation with one's existential situation reminds one that
paradigms are self-created, wafer-thin barriers against the pain of un-
certainty. The mature therapist must, in the existential theoretical ap-
proach as in any other, be able to tolerate this fundamental
uncertainty.
26


                     PART I
                         Death
IN THE NEXT four chapters I shall explore the role played by the
concept of death in psychopathology and psychotherapy. The basic
postulates I describe are simple:
   1. The fear of death plays a major role in our internal experience; it haunts
      as does nothing else; it rumbles continuously under the surface; it is a
      dark, unsettling presence at the rim of consciousness.
   2. The child, at an early age, is pervasively preoccupied with death, and his
      or her major developmental task is to deal with terrifying fears of
      obliteration.
   3. To cope with these fears, we erect defenses against death awareness, de-
      fenses that are based on denial, that shape character structure, and that,
      if maladaptive, result in clinical syndromes. In other words, psycho-
      pathology is the result of ineffective modes of death transcendence.
                                                                              27


                                                           I I DEATH
   4. Lastly, a robust and effective approach to psychotherapy may be con-
      structed on the foundation of death awareness.
  Chapter 2 will provide an overview of the role of the concept of
death in psychotherapy, will present relevant clinical and research evi-
dence, and then will explore why traditional analytic thought has
painstakingly omitted death from both psychotherapy theory and
technique.
  Chapter 3 will discuss the development of the concept of death in
children and will focus on the defense mechanisms that emerge to pro-
tect the individual from death anxiety. Chapter 4 will present a para-
digm of psychopathology based on these death-denying defenses; and
chapter 5 will describe both the theory and the practical implementa-
tion of an approach to therapy based on death awareness.
28


                   CHAPTER 2
  Life, Death, and Anxiety
DON'T SCRATCH where it doesn't itch," the great Adolph Meyer
counseled a generation of student psychiatrists. 1 Is that adage not an
excellent argument against investigating patients' attitudes toward
death? Do not patients have quite enough fear and quite enough dread
without the therapist reminding them of the grimmest of life's hor-
rors? Why focus on bitter and immutable reality? If the goal of therapy
is to instill hope, why invoke hope-defeating death? The aim of ther-
apy is to help the individual learn how to live. Why not leave death for
the dying?
   These arguments demand a response, and I shall address them in this
chapter by arguing that death itches all the time, that our attitudes
toward death influence the way we live and grow and the way we fal-
ter and fall ill. I shall examine two basic propositions, each of which
has major implications for the practice of psychotherapy:
    1. Life and death are interdependent; they exist simultaneously, not con-
       secutively; death whirs continuously beneath the membrane of life and
       exerts a vast influence upon experience and conduct.
    2. Death is a primordial source of anxiety and, as such, is the primary fount
       of psychopathology.
                                                                               29


                                                             I I DEATH
                       Life-Death Interdependence
A venerable line of thought, stretching back to the beginning of writ-
ten thought, emphasizes the interdigitation of life and death. It is one
of life's most self-evident truths that everything fades, that we fear the
fading, and that we must live, nonetheless, in the face of the fading, in
the face of the fear. Death, the Stoics said, was the most important
event in life. Learning to live well is to learn to die well; and converse-
ly, learning to die well is to learn to live well. Cicero said, "To philoso-
phize is to prepare for death," 2 and Seneca: "No man enjoys the true
taste of life but he who is willing and ready to quit it." 3 Saint Augus-
tine expressed the same idea: "It is only in the face of death that man's
self is born."'
   It is not possible to leave death to the dying. The biological life-death
boundary is relatively precise; but, psychologically, life and death
merge into one another. Death is a fact of life; a moment's reflection
tells us that death is not simply the last moment of life. "Even in birth
we die; the end is there from the start" (Manilius).5 Montaigne, in his
penetrating essay on death, asked, "Why do you fear your last day? It
contributes no more to your death than each of the others. The last step
does not cause the fatigue, but reveals it." 6
   It would be a simple matter (and a most seductive one) to continue
citing important quotations about death. Virtually every great thinker
(generally early in life or toward its end) has thought deeply and writ-
ten about death; and many have concluded that death is inextricably a
part of life, and that lifelong consideration of death enriches rather
than impoverishes life. Although the physicality of death destroys
man, the idea of death saves him.
   This last thought is so important that it bears repeating: although the
physicality of death destroys man, the idea of death saves him. But what
precisely does this statement mean? How does the idea of death save
man? And save him from what?
   A brief look at a core concept of existential philosophy may provide
clarification. Martin Heidegger, in 1926, explored the question how the
idea of death may save man, and arrived at the important insight that
the awareness of our personal death acts as a spur to shift us from one
mode of existence to a higher one. Heidegger believed that there are
two fundamental modes of existing in the world: (1) a state of forget-
fulness of being or (2) a state of mindfulness of being. 7
   When one lives in a state of forgetfulness of being, one lives in the
30


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
world of things and immerses oneself in the everyday diversions of
life: One is "leveled down," absorbed in "idle chatter," lost in the
"they." One surrenders oneself to the everyday world, to a concern
about the way things are.
   In the other state, the state of mindfulness of being, one marvels not
about the way things are but that they are. To exist in this mode means
to be continually aware of being. In this mode, which is often referred
to as the "ontological mode" (from the Greek ontos, meaning "exis-
tence"), one remains mindful of being, not only mindful of the fragil-
ity of being but mindful, too (as I shall discuss in chapter 6), of one's re-
sponsibility for one's own being. Since it is only in this ontological
mode that one is in touch with one's self-creation, it is only here that
one can grasp the power to change oneself.
   Ordinarily one lives in the first state. Forgetfulness of being is the
everyday mode of existence. Heidegger refers to it as "inauthentic" -a
mode in which one is unaware of one's authorship of one's life and
world, in which one "flees," "falls," and is tranquilized, in which one
avoids choices by being "carried along by the nobody." 8 When, how-
ever, one enters the second mode of being (mindfulness of being), one
exists authentically (hence, the frequent modern use of the term "au-
thenticity" in psychology). In this state, one becomes fully self-aware-
aware of oneself as a transcendental (constituting) ego as well as an
empirical (constituted) ego; one embraces one's possibilities and limits;
one faces absolute freedom and nothingness-and is anxious in the
face of them.
   Now, what does death have to do with all this? Heidegger realized
that one doesn't move from a state of forgetfulness of being to a more
enlightened, anxious mindfulness of being by simple contemplation,
by bearing down, by gritting one's teeth. There are certain unalterable,
irremediable conditions, certain "urgent experiences" that jolt one,
that tug one from the first, everyday, state of existence to the state of
mindfulness of being. Of these urgent experiences (Jaspers later re-
ferred to them as "border" or "boundary" or "limit" situations 9), death
is the nonpareil: death is the condition that makes it possible for us to live life
in an authentic fashion.
   This point of view-that death makes a positive contribution to
life-is not one easily accepted. Generally we view death as such an
unmitigated evil that we dismiss any contrary view as an implausible
joke. We can manage quite well without the plague, thank you.
   But suspend judgment for a moment and imagine life without any
thought of death. Life loses something of its intensity. Life shrinks
                                                                                31


                                                                   I I DEATH
when death is denied. Freud who, for reasons I shall discuss shortly,
spoke little of death, believed that the transience of life augments our
joy in it. "Limitation in the possibility of an enjoyment raises the value
of the enjoyment." Freud, writing during the First World War, said that
the lure of war was that it brought death into life once again: "Life has,
indeed, become interesting again; it has recovered its full content." 10
When death is excluded, when one loses sight of the stakes involved,
life becomes impoverished. It is turned into something, Freud wrote,
"as shallow and empty as, let us say, an American flirtation, in which it
is understood from the first that nothing is to happen, as contrasted
with a continental love-affair in which both partners must constantly
bear its serious consequences in mind." 11
   Many have speculated that the absence of the fact of death, as well as
of the idea of death, would result in the same blunting of one's sensi-
bilities to life. For example, in the French playwright Jean Giraudoux's
Amphitryon 38, there is a conversation between the immortal gods. Jupi-
ter tells Mercury what it is like to don earthly guise to make love to a
mortal woman:
       She will use little expressions and that widens the abyss between us ....
       She will say, "When I was a child"-or "When I am old"-or "Never in
       all my life"-This stabs me, Mercury .... We miss something, Mercury-
       the poignance of the transient-the intimation of mortality-that sweet
       sadness of grasping at something you cannot hold?" 12
   Similarly, Montaigne imagines a conversation in which Chiron, half-
god, half-mortal, refuses immortality when his father, Saturn (the god
of time and duration), describes the implications of the choice:
       Imagine honestly how much less bearable and more painful to man
       would be an everlasting life than the life I have given him. If you did
       not have death, you would curse me incessantly for having deprived
       you of it. I have deliberately mixed with it a little bitterness to keep you,
       seeing the convenience of it, from embracing it too greedily and intem-
       perately. To lodge you in the moderate state that I ask of you, of neither
       fleeing life nor fleeing back from death, I have tempered both of them
       between sweetness and bitterness. 13
   I do not wish to participate in a necrophilic cult or to advocate a life-
denying morbidity. But it must not be forgotten that our basic dilemma
is that each of us is both angel and beast of the field; we are the mortal
creatures who, because we are self-aware, know that we are mortal. A
denial of death at any level is a denial of one's basic nature and begets
an increasingly pervasive restriction of awareness and experience. The
32


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
integration of the idea of death saves us; rather than sentence us to exis-
tences of terror or bleak pessimism, it acts as a catalyst to plunge us into
more authentic life modes, and it enhances our pleasure in the living
of life. As corroboration we have the testimony of individuals who
have had a personal confrontation with death.
CONFRONTATION WITH DEATH: PERSONAL CHANGE
    Some of our greatest literary works have portrayed the positive ef-
fects on an individual of a close encounter with death.
    Tolstoy's War and Peace provides an excellent illustration of how
death may instigate a radical personal change. 14 Pierre, the protagonist,
feels deadened by the meaningless, empty life of the Russian aristocra-
cy. A lost soul, he stumbles through the first nine hundred pages of the
novel searching for some purpose in life. The pivotal point of the book
occurs when Pierre is captured by Napoleon's troops and sentenced to
death by firing squad. Sixth in line, he watches the execution of the
five men in front of him and prepares to die-only, at the last moment,
to be unexpectedly reprieved. The experience transforms Pierre, who
then spends the remaining three hundred pages of the novel living his
life zestfully and purposefully. He is able to give himself fully in his
relationships to others, to be keenly aware of his natural surroundings,
to discover a task in life that has meaning for him, and to dedicate him-
self to it. •
    Tolstoy's story 'The Death of Ivan Ilyich" contains a similar mes-
sage.15 Ivan Ilyich, a mean-spirited bureaucrat, develops a fatal illness,
probably abdominal cancer, and suffers extraordinary pain. His an-
guish continues relentlessly until, shortly before his death, Ivan Ilyich
comes upon a stunning truth: he is dying badly because he has lived badly.
In the few days remaining to him, Ivan Ilyich undergoes a dramatic
transformation that is difficult to describe in any other terms than per-
sonal growth. If Ivan Ilyich were a patient, any psychotherapist would
beam with pride at the changes in him: he relates more empathically to
others; his chronic bitterness, arrogance, and self-aggrandizement dis-
appear. In short, in the last few days of his life he achieves a far higher
level of integration than he has ever reached previously.
    This phenomenon occurs with great frequency in the world of the
clinician. For example, interviews with six of the ten would-be suicides
who leaped off the Golden Gate Bridge and survived indicate that, as a
    • In re'allife, Dostoevsky was reprieved at the age of twenty-nine from execution by a
firing squad at the last minute-an event that crucially influenced his life and his fiction.
                                                                                          33


                                                                  1/DEATH
result of their leap into death, these six had changed their views of
life. 16 One reported, "My will to live has taken over.... There is a be-
nevolent God in heaven who permeates all things in the universe."
Another: "We are all members of the Godhead-that great God human-
ity." Another: "I have a strong life drive now .... My whole life is re-
born.... I have broken out of old pathways .... I can now sense other
people's existence." Another: "I feel I love God now and wish to do
something for others." Another:
         I was refilled with a new hope and purpose in being alive. It's beyond
         most people's comprehension. I appreciate the miracle of life-like
         watching a bird fly-everything is more meaningful when you come
         close to losing it. I experienced a feeling of unity with all things and a
         oneness with all people. After my psychic rebirth I also feel for every-
         one's pain. Everything was clear and bright.
   Other clinical examples abound. Abraham Schmitt describes in detail
a chronically depressed patient who made a serious suicide attempt and
survived by sheer chance, and points out the "total discontinuity be-
tween the two halves of her life" -before and after her suicide attempt.
Schmitt speaks of his professional contact with her not as therapy but
as a monitoring of her drastic life change. To describe her, her friends
use the word "vibrant," meaning "tinkling with life and enthusiasm."
The therapist states that following her suicide attempt she was, "in
touch with herself, her life and her husband. Her life is now lived to
the fullest and is filling many other lives .... Within a year after the
suicide and the transition she became pregnant with the first of several
children who were born in quick succession. (She had long been
barren)." 17
   Russel Noyes studied two hundred individuals who had near-death
experiences (automobile accidents, drownings, mountain climbing
falls, and so forth), and reported that a substantial number (23 percent)
described, even years later, that as a result of their experience they pos-
sessed a
         strong sense of the shortness of life and the preciousness of it ... a great-
         er sense of zest in life, a heightening of perception and emotional re-
         sponsivity to immediate surroundings ... an ability to live in the mo-
         ment and to savor each moment as it passes ... a greater awareness of
         life-awareness of life and living things and the urge to enjoy it now be-
         fore it is too late. 18
Many described a "reassessment of priorities," of becoming more com-
passionate and more human-oriented than they had been before.
34


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
   Abdul Hussain and Seymour Tozman, physicians on a prison's
"death row," describe, in a clinical case report, three men condemned
to death, who received last-minute reprieves. All three, according to
the authors, evinced a deep alteration in personality style and a "re-
markable change in attitude" which persisted through the follow-up of
several months. 19
   Cancer: Confrontation with Death.       The Chinese picto0 ram      for "crisis"
is a combination of two symbols: "danger" and "opportunity." Over
my many years of work with terminally ill cancer patients, I have been
struck by how many of them use their crisis and their danger as an op-
portunity for change. They report startling shifts, inner changes that
can be characterized in no other way than "personal growth":
   •  A rearrangement of life's priorities: a trivializing of the trivial
   •  A sense of liberation: being able to choose not to do those things that
      th.ey do not wish to do
   •  An enhanced sense of living in the immediate present, rather than post-
      poning life until retirement or some other point in the future
   •  A vivid appreciation of the elemental facts of life: the changing seasons,
      the wind, falling leaves, the last Christmas, and so forth
   •  Deeper communication with loved ones than before the crisis
   •  Fewer interpersonal fears, less concern about rejection, greater willing-
      ness to take risks, than before the crisis.
   Senator Richard Neuberger, shortly before his death from cancer, de-
scribed these changes:
         A change came over me which I believe is irreversible. Questions of
      prestige, of political success, of financial status, became all at once unim-
      portant. In those first hours when I realized I had cancer, I never
      thought of my seat in the Senate, of my bank account, or of the destiny
      of the free world .... My wife and I have not had a quarrel since my ill-
      ness was diagnosed. I used to scold her about squeezing the toothpaste
      from the top instead of the bottom, about not catering sufficiently to my
      fussy appetite, about making up guest lists without consulting me, about
      spending too much on clothes. Now I am either unaware of such mat-
      ters, or they seem irrelevant. ...
         in their stead has come a new appreciation of things I once took for
      granted-eating lunch with a friend, scratching Muffet's ears and listen-
      ing for his purrs, the company of my wife, reading a book or magazine
      in the quiet cone of my bed lamp at night, raiding the refrigerator for a
      glass of orange juice or slice of coffee cake. For the first time I think I ac-
      tually am savoring life. I realize, finally, that I am not immortal. I shud-
      der when I remember all the occasions that I spoiled for myself-even
      when I was in the best of health-by false pride, synthetic values, and
      fancied slights. 20
                                                                                  35


                                                                        I I DEATH
   How commonly do positive personal changes follow a confrontation
with death? The cancer patients I studied were a self-selected sample
consisting of psychologically minded women with cancer who had
elected to seek a support group for cancer patients. To examine the
general prevalence of this phenomenon, my colleagues and I designed
a research project to study patients in a purely medical setting. 21 We
constructed a questionnaire to measure some of these personal changes
and administered it to seventy consecutive patients who consulted
medical oncologists for treatment of metastatic breast cancer (cancer
that has spread elsewhere in the body, and for which there is no surgi-
cal or medical cure). • One part of the questionnaire consisted of seven-
teen personal-growth statements, t each of which patients were asked
to score on a five-point scale (ranging from "hardly ever" to "always")
for two time periods: "before" the onset of cancer and "now." When
we examined the results, we learned that the majority of patients had
rated no changes between "before" and "now." However, of those pa-
tients who did report differences between "before" and "now," the dif-
ferences were almost invariably in the direction of greater growth
since the onset of cancer. More patients reported positive than negative
changes on fourteen of the seventeen items.:j: Some of the items
     • The patients in the study were all outpatients: few had incapacitating physical pain
or disability. They all knew their diagnosis and knew, too, that, though they might live
 for months or even years, they would ultimately die of their disease.
     t 1. I communicate openly with my husband.
        2. I appreciate the beauty of nature.
        3. I have a sense of personal freedom.
        4. I try to communicate openly with my children.
        5. It is important to me to be liked by everyone.
        6. I obtain much pleasure from life.
        7. I communicate honestly and frankly.
        8. I do only those things I really want to do.
        9. I live in the present rather than in the past or future.
       10. I have moments of deep serenity.
       11. I stand up for my own personal rights.
       12. I have a sense of psychological well-being.
       13. I communicate openly with my friends.
       14. I feel I have something of value to teach others about life.
       15. I am able to choose what I want to do.
       16. My life has meaning and purpose.
       17. Religiousispiritual beliefs have much significance for me.
   :j: The only two items that showed a reversal were item 3 ("I have a sense of personal
freedom") which I believe was probably influenced by the great physical restrictions suf-
fered by the cancer patient, and item 13 ("I communicate openly with my friends"). The
explanation for the latter reversal probably lay in the fact that many of the patients'
friends demonstrated extreme discomfort; patients found that while some close relation-
ships were strengthened, many others were strained.
36


 2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
 showed significant differences: for example, on item 14 ("I feel I have
 something of value to teach others about life") eighteen patients report
 a positive shift, three a negative one; item 11 ("I stand up for my own
 personal rights")-twelve positive, three negative; item 2 ("I appreci-
 ate the beauty of nature")-eleven positive, two negative. Who would
 suspect that terminal cancer might increase one's "moments of deep se-
 renity" (item 10)? Yet eighteen patients reported such an increase (in
 contrast to eight who reported a negative shift).
     Another part of the questionnaire examined changes in the intensity
 of common fears. Twenty-nine fears were selected from a standard fear
 check list, • and patients were asked to rate severity ("before" cancer
 and "now"). The results of this questionnaire indicated the same trend
 in the personal growth items, though not of the same magnitude. On
 nine items patients reported greater fear since the onset of cancer; on
 one item there was an equal shift (the same number of patients report-
 ed less fear "now" as reported more fear "now"); and on nineteen of the
 twenty-nine items, more patients reported less fear "now" than "before" they
 had cancer.
     Though no other systematic studies of this phenomenon appear in
 the literature,t most therapists can supply anecdotal clinical material to
 illustrate it. Many therapists have worked with patients who in the
 midst of therapy had some confrontation with death which resulted in
 a rapid change in life perspective and a realignment of life's priorities.
  • 1. Dead people                              16. Being touched by others
    2. Angry people                             17. Feeling different from others
    3. Parting from friends                     18. Being alone
    4. Enclosed places                          19. Being in a strange place
    5. Feeling rejected by others               20. Speaking in public
    6. Feeling disapproved of                   21. Bad dreams
    7. Being ignored                            22. Failure
    8. Darkness                                 23. Entering a room where other people
    9. People with deformities                      are already seated
   10. Making mistakes                          24. Looking down from high buildings
   11. Looking foolish                          25. Strangers
  12.  Losing control                           26. Feeling angry
   13. Being in charge or responsible for       27. People in authority
       decisions                                28. A lull in conversation
   14. Becoming mentally ill                    29. Crawling insects.
   15. Taking written tests
    t Some studies 22 have been conducted on hospitalized patients near death and report
many more negative findings than in our study; but such patients are often isolated, ca-
chectic, and in great pain. Recently a cancer patient took KUbler-Ross to task for this very
point, by emphasizing that Klibler-Ross's "stages" of dying were skewed to a cachectic
hospital population and overlooked the "golden period" that occurs if a patient has time
to assimilate his confrontation with death.21
                                                                                          37


                                                                  I I DEATH
   Schmitt had a patient whom kidney failure had brought extremely
dose to death. After a long period of time on renal dialysis the patient
had a successful kidney transplant and re-entered life with a sense of
both physical and psychological rebirth. She describes her experience:
          Actually the only way I can describe myself is that I think of myself as
       having lived two lives. I even call them the first and the second Kathy.
       The first Kathy died during dialysis. She could not make it long in the
       face of death. A second Kathy had to be born. This is the Kathy that was
       born in the midst of death .... The first Kathy was a frivolous kid. She
       lived only one minute at a time. She quibbled about cold food in the
       cafeteria, about the boredom of surgical nursing lectures, about the un-
       fairness of her parents. Her goal in life was to have fun on the week-
       ends .... The future was far away and of little concern. She lived for
       trivia only.
          But the second Kathy-that's me now. I am infatuated with life. Look
       at the beauty in the sky! It's gorgeously blue! I go into a flower garden,
       and every flower takes on such fabulous colors that I am dazzled by their
       beauty .... One thing I do know, had I remained my first Kathy, I would
       have played away my whole life, and I would never have known what
       the real joy of living was all about. I had to face death eyeball to eyeball
       before I could live. I had to die in order to live. 24
   An unusual confrontation with death afforded a turning point in the
life of Arthur, an alcoholic patient. The patient had had a progressive
downhill course. He had been drinking heavily for several years and
had had no periods of sobriety sufficiently long to permit effective psy-
chotherapeutic contact. He entered a therapy group and one day carne
to the session so intoxicated that he passed out. The group, with Arthur
unconscious on the couch, continued their meeting, discussed what to
do with Arthur, and finally carried him bodily from the session to the
hospital.
   Fortunately the session was videotaped; and later, when Arthur
watched the videotape, he had a profound confrontation with death.
Everyone had been telling him for years he was drinking himself to
death; but until he saw the videotape, he never truly allowed that pos-
sibility to register. The videotape of himself stretched out on the couch,
with the group surrounding his body and talking about him, bore an
uncanny resemblance to the funeral of his twin brother who had died
of alcoholism a year previously. He visualized himself at his own wake
stretched out on a slab and surrounded by friends talking about him.
Arthur was deeply shaken by the vision, embarked on the longest peri-
od of sobriety he had had in adult life, and for the first time committed
himself to therapeutic work, which was ultimately of considerable
benefit to him.
38


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
   My interest in existential therapy was, to a large extent, kindled by
witnessing, several years ago, the impact of death upon one of my pa-
tients. Jane was a twenty-five-year-old perpetual college student who
sought therapy because she was depressed, had severe functional gas-
tric distress, and experienced a pervasive sense of helplessness and
purposelessness. In her initial session she presented her problems in a
diffuse manner and lamented repetitively, "I don't know what's going
on." I did not understand what she meant by this statement and, since
it was imbedded in a lengthy litany of self-derogation, soon forgot it. I
introduced Jane into a therapy group, and in the group she again had a
strong sense of not knowing what was going on. She did not under-
stand what was happening to her, why the other members were so un-
interested in her, why she developed a conversion paralysis, why she
developed masochistic relationships with the other members, why she
became so infatuated with the therapist. To a great extent life was a
mystery, something "out there" happening to her, something raining
upon her.
   In the therapy group Jane was timid and boring. Her every statement
was predictable; before speaking, she scanned the sea of faces in the
group for dues about what others wanted, and then shaped her state-
ments to please as many people as possible. Anything to avoid offense,
to avoid driving others away. (What happened, of course, was that she
drove people away, not from anger but from boredom.) It was dear that
Jane was in chronic retreat from life. Everyone in the group tried to
find "the real Jane" within the cocoon of compliance she had spun
about herself. They tried to encourage Jane; they urged her to socialize,
to study, to write the last paper she needed for graduation, to buy
clothes, to pay her bills, to groom herself, to comb her hair, to prepare
her resume, to apply for jobs.
   This exhortation, like most exhortation in therapy, was not success-
ful, so the group tried another tact: they urged Jane to consider the lure
and the blessing of failure. What was the payoff? Why was failure so
rewarding? That line of inquiry was more productive, and we learned
that the payoff was considerable. Failing kept Jane young, kept her
protected, kept her from having to make choices. Idealizing and wor-
shiping the therapist served the same purpose. Help was "out there."
Her task in therapy, as she viewed it, was to enfeeble herself to the
point where the therapist could not in all good conscience withhold
his royal touch.
   The critical event in therapy occurred when Jane developed a large,
ominous, axillary lymph node. The group met on Tuesday evenings;
and it happened that she had a biopsy done on a Tuesday morning and
                                                                        39


                                                           I I DEATH
had to wait twenty-four hours before learning whether the growth was
malignant. She came to the meeting that evening in terror. She had
never previously contemplated her own death, and the meeting was a
powerful one for her as the group helped her face and express her
fears. Her paramount experience was a terrifying loneliness-a loneli-
ness that she had always perceived on the edge of consciousness and
had always dreaded. In that meeting Jane realized on a deep level that
no matter what s~e did, no matter how she enfeebled herself, she
would ultimately face death alone-no one could intercede for her, no
                      \
one could die her dea,th for her.
   The following day she learned that the lymph node was benign, but
nonetheless the psychological effects of the experience were profound.
Many things began to fall together for Jane. She began to make deci-
sions in a way that she had never done before, and she took over the
helm of her life. At one meeting she commented, "I think I know
what's going on." I had long since forgotten her initial complaint, but
now I remembered and finally understood it. It had been important for
her not to know what was going on. More than anything else, she had
been trying to avoid the loneliness and the death that accompany
adulthood. In a magical way she had tried to defeat death by staying
young, by avoiding choice and responsibility, by choosing to believe
the myth that there would always be someone who would choose for
her, would accompany her, would be there for her. Growing up, choos-
ing, separating oneself from others also mean facing loneliness and
death.
   To summarize, the concept of death plays a crucial role in psycho-
therapy because it plays a crucial role in the life experience of each of
us. Death and life are interdependent: though the physicality of death
destroys us, the idea of death saves us. Recognition of death contributes
a sense of poignancy to life, provides a radical shift of life perspective,
and can transport one from a mode of living characterized by diver-
sions, tranquilization, and petty anxieties to a more authentic mode.
There are, in the examples of individuals undergoing significant per-
sonal change after confrontation with death, obvious and important
implications for psychotherapy. What is needed are techniques to al-
low psychotherapists to mine this therapeutic potential with all pa-
tients, rather than be dependent upon fortuitous circumstances or the
advent of a terminal illness. I shall consider these issues fully in chap-
ter 5.
40


 2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
                           Death and Anxiety
Anxiety plays such a central and obvious role in psychotherapy that
there is little need to belabor the point. The unique position of anxiety
is apparent from traditional psychiatric nosology, in which the major
psychiatric syndromes are called "reactions" -psychotic reactions, neu-
rotic reactions, psychophysiological reactions. We consider these con-
ditions reactions to anxiety. They are efforts, albeit maladaptive ones, to
cope with anxiety. Psychopathology is a vector-the resultant of anxi-
ety and the individual's anxiety-combatting defenses, both neurotic
and characterological. Therapists generally begin work with a patient
by focusing on manifest anxiety, anxiety equivalents, or the defenses
that the individual sets up in an attempt to protect himself or herself
from anxiety. Though therapeutic work extends in many directions,
therapists continue to use anxiety as a beacon or compass point: they
work toward anxiety, uncover its fundamental sources, and attempt as
their final goal to uproot and dismantle these sources.
DEATH ANXIETY: AN INFLUENTIAL DETERMINANT OF HUMAN
EXPERIENCE AND BEHAVIOR
   The terror of death is ubiquitous and of such magnitude that a con-
siderable portion of one's life energy is consumed in the denial of
death. Death transcendence is a major motif in human experience-
from the most deeply personal internal phenomena, our defenses, our
motivations, our dreams and nightmares, to the most public macro-so-
cietal structures, our monuments, theologies, ideologies, slumber ceme-
teries, embalmings, our stretch into space, indeed our entire way of
life-our filling time, our addiction to diversions, our unfaltering be-
lief in the myth of progress, our drive to "get ahead," our yearning for
lasting fame.
   The basic human group, the molecules of social life were, as Freud
speculated, formed out of the fear of death: the first humans huddled
together out of a fear of separateness and a fear of what lurked in the
dark. We perpetuate the group in order to perpetuate ourselves, and
history-taking of the group is a symbolic quest for mediated immortal-
ity. Indeed, as Hegel postulated, history itself is what man does with
death. Robert Jay Lifton has described several modes by which man at-
tempts to achieve symbolic immortality. Consider their pervasive cul-
tural implications: (1) the biological mode-living on through one's
progeny, through an endless chain of biological attachments; (2) the
                                                                         41


                                                            I I DEATH
theological mode-living on in a different, higher plane of existence;
(3) the creative mode-living on through one's works, through the en-
during impact of one's personal creation or impact on others (Lifton
suggests that the therapist draws personal sustenance from this fount:
by helping his patient, he initiates an endless chain as the patient's
children and associates pass on his spore); (4) the theme of eternal na-
ture-one survives through rejoining the swirling life forces of nature;
(5) the experiential transcendent mode-through "losing oneself" in a
state so intense that time and death disappear and one lives in the
"continuous present." 26
   These social ramifications of the fear of death and the quest for im-
mortality are so widespread that they extend far beyond the range of
this book. Among those who have written of these issues, Norman
Brown, Ernest Becker, and Robert Jay Lifton, in particular, have bril-
liantly demonstrated how the fear of death has permeated the fabric of
our social structure. Here I am concerned with the effects of death anxi-
ety on the internal dynamics of the individual. I shall argue that the
fear of death is a primal source of anxiety. Although this position is
simple and consonant with everyday intuition, its ramifications for
theory and clinical practice are, as we shall see, extensive.
DEATH ANXIETY: DEFINITION
   First, let me examine the meaning of "death anxiety." I shall use sev-
eral terms interchangeably: "death anxiety," "fear of death," "mortal
terror," "fear of finitude." Philosophers speak of the awareness of the
"fragility of being" (Jaspers), of dread of "non-being" (Kierkegaard), of
the "impossibility of further possibility" (Heidegger), or of ontological
anxiety (Tillich). Many of these phrases imply a difference in empha-
sis, for individuals may experience the fear of death in very different
ways. Can we be more precise? What exactly is it that we fear about
death?
   Researchers investigating this issue have suggested that the fear is a
composite of a number of smaller discrete fears. For example, James
Diggory and Doreen Rothman asked a large sample (N=563) drawn
from the general population to rank-order several consequences of
death. In order of descending frequency, these were the common fears
about death:
    1. My death would cause grief to my relatives and friends.
    2. All my plans and projects would come to an end.
    3. The process of dying might be painful.
    4. I could no longer have any experiences.
42


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
    5. I would no longer be able to care for my dependents.
    6. I am afraid of what might happen to me if there is a life after death.
    7. I am afraid of what might happen to my body after death."6
   Of these fears, several seem tangential to personal death. Fears about
pain obviously lie on this side of death; fears about an afterlife beg the
question by changing death into a nonterminal event; fears about oth-
ers are obviously not fears about oneself. The fear of personal extinc-
tion seems to be at the vortex of concern: "my plans and projects would
come to an end," and "I could no longer have any experiences."
   Jacques Choron, in a review of major philosophic views about death,
arrives at a similar analysis. He distinguishes three types of death fear:
(1) what comes after death, (2) the "event" of dying, and (3) ceasing to
be. 27 Of these, the first two are, as Robert Kastenbaum points out, fears
related to death. 28 It is the third, "ceasing to be" (obliteration, extinction,
annihilation), that seems more centrally the fear of death; and it is this
fear to which I refer in these chapters.
   Kierkegaard was the first to make a clear distinction between fear
and anxiety (dread); he contrasted fear that is fear of some thing with
dread that is a fear of no thing-"not," as he wryly noted, "a nothing
with which the individual has nothing to do." 29 One dreads (or is anx-
ious about) losing oneself and becoming nothingness. This anxiety can-
not be located. As Rollo May says, "it attacks us from all sides at
once." 30 A fear that can neither be understood nor located cannot be
confronted and becomes more terrible still: it begets a feeling of help-
lessness which invariably generates further anxiety. (Freud felt that
anxiety was a reaction to helplessness; anxiety, he wrote, "is a signal
which announces that there is danger" and the individual is "expect-
ing a situation of helplessness to set in." 31
   How can we combat anxiety? By displacing it from nothing to something.
This is what Kierkegaard meant by "the nothing which is the object of
dread becomes, as it were, more and more a something." 32 It is what
Rollo May means by "anxiety seeks to become fear." 33 If we can trans-
form a fear of nothing to a fear of something, we can mount some self-
protective campaign-that is, we can either avoid the thing we fear,
seek allies against it, develop magical rituals to placate it, or plan a sys-
tematic campaign to detoxify it.
DEATH ANXIETY: CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
  The fact that anxiety seeks to become fear confounds the clinician's
attempt to identify the primal source of anxiety. Primal death anxiety is
                                                                              43


                                                           I I DEATH
rarely encountered in its original form in clinical work. Like nascent
oxygen, it is rapidly transformed to another state. To ward off death
anxiety, the young child develops protective mechanisms which, as I
shall discuss in the next chapter, are denial-based, pass through several
stages, and eventually consist of a highly complex set of mental oper-
ations that repress naked death anxiety and bury it under layers of such
defensive operations as displacement, sublimation, and conversion. Oc-
casionally some jolting experience in life tears a rent in the curtain of
defenses and permits raw death anxiety to erupt into consciousness.
Rapidly, however, the unconscious ego repairs the tear and conceals
once again the nature of the anxiety.
   I can provide an illustration from my personal experience. While I
was engaged in writing this book, I was involved in a head-on auto-
mobile collision. Driving along a peaceful suburban street, I suddenly
saw, looming before me, a car out of control and heading directly at
me. Though the crash was of sufficient force to demolish both auto-
mobiles, and though the other driver suffered severe lacerations, I was
fortunate and suffered no significant physical injury. I caught a plane
two hours later and was able that evening to deliver a lecture in an-
other city. Yet, without question, I was severely shaken, I felt dazed,
was tremulous, and could not eat or sleep. The next evening I was un-
wise enough to see a frightening movie (Carrie) which thoroughly ter-
rified me, and I left before its end. I returned home a couple of days lat-
er with no obvious psychological sequellae aside from occasional
insomnia and anxiety dreams.
   Yet a strange problem arose. At the time I was spending a year as a
fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences in
Palo Alto, California. I enjoyed my colleagues and especially looked
forward to the daily leisurely luncheon discussions of scholarly issues.
Immediately after the accident I developed intense anxiety around
these lunches. Would I have anything of significance to say? How
would my colleagues regard me? Would I make a fool of myself? After
a few days the anxiety was so extreme that I began to search for excuses
to lunch elsewhere by myself.
   I also began, however, to analyze my predicament, and one fact was
abundantly clear: the luncheon anxiety appeared for the first time fol-
lowing the automobile accident. Furthermore, explicit anxiety about
the accident, about so nearly losing my life, had, within a day or two,
entirely vanished. It was clear that anxiety had succeeded in becoming
fear. Considerable death anxiety had erupted immediately following
the accident, and I had "handled" it primarily by displacement-by
44


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
splitting it from its true source and riveting it to a convenient specific
situation. My fundamental death anxiety thus had only a brief efflores-
cence before being secularized to such lesser concerns as self-esteem,
fear of interpersonal rejection, or humiliation.
   Although I had handled, or "processed," my anxiety, I had not eradi-
cated it; and traces were evident for months afterward. Even though I
had worked through my lunch phobia, a series of other fears
emerged-fears of driving a car, of bicycling. Months later when I
went skiing, I found myself so cautious, so frightened of some mishap
that my skiing pleasure and ability were severely compromised. Still
these fears could be located in space and time and could be managed in
some systematic way. Annoying as they were, they were not funda-
mental, they did not threaten my being.
   In addition to these specific fears, I noted one other change: the
world seemed precarious. It had lost, for me, its hominess: danger
seemed everywhere. The nature of reality had shifted, as I experienced
what Heidegger called "uncanniness" (unheimlich)-the experience of
"not being at home in the world," which he considered (and to which I
can attest) a typical consequence of death awareness. 34
   One further property of death anxiety that has often created confu-
sion in mental health literature is that the fear of death can be experi-
enced at many different levels. One may, as I have discussed, worry
about the act of dying, fear of pain of dying, regret unfinished projects,
mourn the end of personal experience, or consider death as rationally
and dispassionately as the Epicureans who concluded simply that death
holds no terror because "where I am, death is not; where death is, I am
not. Therefore death is nothing to me" (Lucretius). Yet keep in mind
that these responses are adult conscious reflections on the phenom-
enon of death; by no means are they identical to the primitive dread of
death that resides in the unconscious-a dread that is part of the fabric
of being, that is formed early in life at a time before the development
of precise conceptual formulation, a dread that is chilling, uncanny,
and inchoate, a dread that exists prior to and outside of language and
image.
   The clinician rarely encounters death anxiety in its stark form: this
anxiety is handled by conventional defenses (for example, repression,
displacement, rationalization) and by some defenses specific only to it
(see chapter 4). Of course this situation should not overly trouble us: it
prevails for every theory of anxiety. Primary anxiety is always trans-
formed into something less toxic for the individual; that is the function
of the entire system of psychological defenses. It is rare, to use a Freud-
                                                                        45


                                                                      I I DEATH
ian frame of reference, for a clinician to observe undisguised castration
anxiety; instead, one sees some transformation of anxiety. For example,
a male patient may be phobic of women, or fearful of competing with
males in certain social situations, or inclined to obtain sexual gratifica-
tion in some mode other than heterosexual intercourse.
    A clinician who has developed the existential "set," however, will
recognize the "processed" death anxiety and be astonished at the fre-
quency and the diversity of its appearance. Let me give some clinical
examples. I recently saw two patients who sought therapy not because
of existential anxiety but to solve commonplace, painful relationship
problems.
    Joyce was a thirty-year-old university professor who was in the
 midst of a painful divorce. She had first dated Jack when she was fif-
 teen and married him at twenty-one. The marriage had obviously not
gone well for several years, and they had separated three years pre-
viously. Although Joyce had formed a satisfying relationship with an-
other man, she was unable to proceed with a divorce. In fact, her chief
complaint when entering therapy was her uncontrollable weeping
whenever she talked to Jack. An analysis of her weeping uncovered
several important factors.
    First, it was of the utmost importance that Jack continue to love her.
Even though she no longer loved him or wanted him, she wanted very
much that he think of her often and love her as he had never loved any
other woman. "Why?" I asked. "Everyone wishes to be remembered,"
she replied. "It's a way of putting myself into posterity." She reminded
me that the Jewish Kaddish ritual is built around the assumption that,
as long as one is remembered by one's children, one continues to exist.
When Jack forgot her, she died a little ...
    Another source of Joyce's tears was her feeling that she and Jack had
shared many lovely and important experiences. Without their union,
 these events, she felt, would perish. The fading of the past is a vivid re-
 minder of the relentless rush of time. As the past disappears, so does
 the coil of the future shorten. Joyce's husband helped her to freeze
 time-the future as well as the past. Though she was not conscious of
 it, it was clear that Joyce was frightened of using up the future. She had
    • Allen Sharp in A Green Tree in Geddes describes a small Mexican cemetery that is di-
vided into two parts: the "dead" whose graves are still adorned with flowers placed there
by the living, and the "truly dead" whose grave sites are no longer maintained-they are
remembered by no living sout.•• In a sense, then, when a very old person dies, many oth-
ers die also; the dead person takes them along. All those recently dead who are remem-
bered by no one else become, at that moment, "truly" dead.
46


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
a habit, for example, of never quite completing a task: if she were do-
ing housework, she always left one corner of the house uncleaned. She
dreaded being "finished." She never started a book without another
one on her night table awaiting its turn. One is reminded of Proust
whose major literary corpus was devoted to escaping "the devouring
jaws of time" by recapturing the past.
   Still another reason why Joyce wept was her fear of failure. Life had
until recently been an uninterrupted stairway of success. To fail in her
marriage meant that she would be, as she often put it, "just like every-
one else." Though she had considerable talent, her expectations were
grandiose. She anticipated achieving international prominence, per-
haps winning a Nobel prize for a research program upon which she
was embarking. If that success did not occur within five years, she
planned to turn her energies to fiction and write the You Can't Go Home
Again of the 1970s-although she had never written any fiction. Yet
she had reason for her sense of specialness: thus far she had not failed
to accomplish every one of her goals. The failure of her marriage was
the first interruption of her ascent, the first challenge to her solipsistic
assumptive world. The failure of the marriage threatened her sense of
specialness, which as I will discuss in chapter 4, is one of the most com-
mon and potent death-denying defenses.
  Joyce's commonplace problem, then, had roots stretching back to pri-
mal death anxiety. To me, an existentially oriented therapist, these
clinical phenomena-the wish to be loved and remembered eternally,
the wish to freeze time, the belief in personal invulnerability, the wish
to merge with another-all served the same function for Joyce: to as-
suage death anxiety.
  As she analyzed each one and came to understand the common
source of these phenomena, Joyce's clinical picture improved remark-
ably. Most strikingly, as she gave up her neurotic needs for Jack, and
stopped using him for all the death-defying functions he served, she
was able to turn toward him for the first time in a truly loving fashion
and re-establish the marriage on an entirely different basis. But that is
another issue, which I shall address in chapter 8.
  Then there was Beth, a thirty-year-old single woman, who sought
therapy because of her inability to form a gratifying relationship with a
man. She had on many occasions previously "chosen poorly," as she
put it, and had broken off the relationship because she lost interest in
the man. While in therapy she repeated the cycle: she fell in love with
a man, entered a tormented state of indecision, and finally was unable
to make a commitment to him.
                                                                         47


                                                            I I DEATH
    As we analyzed her dilemma, it became apparent that she felt pres-
sured to form an enduring relationship: she was tired of loneliness,
 tired of living the singles life, and desperately eager to have children.
The pressure was intensified by her concerns about growing older and
passing the childbearing age.
   When, however, her lover tried to discuss marriage, she panicked;
and the more he pressed, the more anxious she grew. Beth likened mar-
riage to being pinned to the wall: she would be fixed, forever, the way
formaldehyde fixes a biological specimen. It was important to keep
growing, to become something else, something other than what she
was; and she feared her lover was too complacent, too satisfied, with
himself and his life. Gradually Beth became aware of the importance of
this motif in her life. She had never lived in the present. Even when
eating or serving a meal, she had stayed one course ahead; when eating
a main course, her thoughts were dwelling on dessert. She had often
thought with horror about "settling down," which she equated with
"settling in." "Is this all there is to life?" she frequently asked herself
when she thought of marriage or any other form of commitment.
   As Beth, in therapy, delved into these areas-her compulsion to be
always ahead of herself, her fear of aging, of death and stagnation-
she grew more anxious than ever before. One evening following a ses-
sion in which we had probed particularly deeply, she experienced ex-
traordinary terror. While walking her dog, she had the uncanny feel-
ing she was being pursued by some unearthly being. She looked
behind herself, on all sides, and finally broke into a run and scurried
home. Later a rainstorm broke out, and she lay awake all night with an_
irrational terror that the roof would be torn off, or that her house
would be washed away. As I will discuss in chapter 5, an augmentation
of anxiety often occurs when fear of some thing (in Beth's case, a fear of
marriage or of making the wrong choice) is understood for what it tru-
ly is-a fear of no thing. For Beth, both the press toward marriage and
the fear of marriage were in part surface reverberations of a deeper
struggle to contain death anxiety.
    Many clinicians have described the presence and the transformation
of death anxiety across the entire spectrum of clinical psychopathol-
ogy. Chapter 4 deals with this in depth, and I need only highlight it
here. R. Skoog reports that over 70 percent of patients with a severe ob-
sessional neurosis had, at the onset of illness, a security-disturbing
death experience. As the syndrome develops, patients are increasingly
concerned about controlling their world and preventing the unexpect-
ed or accidental. Patients shun disorder or uncleanliness and develop
48


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
rituals to ward off evil and danger. 36 Erwin Strauss notes that the obses-
sional patient's disgust at decay, illness, germs, and dirt was intimately
related to fear of personal annihilation. 37 W. Schwidder observes that
these obsessive defenses were not entirely effective in absorbing death
anxiety. In a study of over a hundred obsessional-phobic patients he
notes that a third feared constriction and darkness and that a somewhat
larger proportion had explicit death anxiety. 38
   Herbert Lazarus and John Kostan, in an extensive study of the hyper-
ventilation syndrome (an extremely common condition: between 5 and
10 percent of all patients consulting physicians suffer from this com-
plaint), emphasize the underlying dynamic of death anxiety, which is
transformed into a series of other phobias. An inability to bind death
anxiety sufficiently results in the hyperventilation panic. 39
   D. B. Friedman describes an obsessional patient whose death anxiety
took the form of an obsessive thought that he would be forgotten by
everyone. Linked to this was his preoccupation that he was always
missing the exciting things in the world about him: "Something really
new happens only when I'm not around, before my time, or after my
time, before I was born or after I'm dead." 40
   Death anxiety is only thinly disguised in the hypochondriacal pa-
tient who is continually concerned about the safety and well-being of
his or her body. Hypochondriacal illness in a patient often begins after
a severe illness suffered by that patient or by someone close to him or
her. Early in the course of the affliction, V. Kral observes, there is a di-
rectly experienced fear of death which is later diffused among many
body organs! 1
   Several clinical investigations have reported the central role of death
anxiety in depersonalization syndromes! 2 Martin Roth for example,
found that death or severe illness was the precipitating event in over
50 percent of patients reporting a depersonalization syndrome!3
   These neurotic syndromes share one important common feature:
though they inconvenience and restrict a patient, they all succeed in
protecting him or her from overt and terrifying death anxiety.
DEATH ANXIETY: EMPIRICAL RESEARCH
   Over the past three decades there has been a continuous but feeble
stream of empirical social science research on death. Virtually every re-
search article on death begins with a clarion call to research and either
a lament or an indignant protest about the lack of careful investigation.
After reviewing the literature, I cannot help but echo a similar com-
plaint. Certainly the contrast between the speculative or impressionis-
                                                                         49


                                                          I I DEATH
tic writings on death and the methodical research into it is striking. For
example, a bibliography on death up to 1972 listed over 2,600 books
and articles; yet fewer than 2 percent report empirical research, and
only a handful bear direct relevance to existential theory and therapy.
   The research even remotely relevant to my present discussion at-
tempts to investigate the following issues: the incidence of death anxi-
ety, correlative studies of the degree of death anxiety and a number of
variables-demographic (age, sex, marital status, occupation, religion,
education, and so forth), personality factors (MMPI dimensions"', gen-
eral anxiety or depression levels), and life experiences (early loss, insti-
tutionalization)-and the relation of death anxiety to psychopathology
or to other psychological experience, especially fantasies, dreams, and
nightmares.
   So far, so good. However, as Robert Kastenbaum and Ruth Aisenberg
point out in their thoughtful review, the studies, with few exceptions,
are either severely limited in scope or severely flawed methodological-
ly!• Many studies investigate death in an imprecise fashion; for exam-
ple, they fail to distinguish between one's fear of one's own death,
one's fear of the death of another, or one's fear of the effects of one's
death on others.
   An even more serious problem, however, is that most studies have
measured conscious attitudes toward death or conscious manifest anxi-
ety. To compound the problem still further, the studies use instruments
that (with a couple of exceptions45 ) are hastily constructed, "home
brew" scales whose reliability or validity has not been established.
   One occupational study is of interest. Medical students were studied
using a conscious death anxiety scale and the "authoritarian'' scale
(California Personality Inventory F scale). A negative relationship was
found between death anxiety and authoritarianism-that is, the more
authoritarianism, the less death anxiety, and vice versa). Moreover,
medical students who chose to enter psychiatry had more death anxi-
ety (and were less authoritarian) than those who entered surgery!6 Per-
haps surgeons are better defended against death anxiety, and psychia-
trists more aware of death anxiety. (Perhaps, too, fledgling
psychiatrists have more absolute death anxiety and enter the mental
health field in search of personal relief.)
   Several projects report that devoutly religious individuals have less
death anxiety} 7 Students who have lost a parent have higher death
anxiety! 8 Most studies show few differences related to age) 9 although
    • Minnesota Multiple Personality Inventory.
50


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
there is a positive relationship between death concerns and nearness to
death. 50 A study of the most common fears of one thousand college co-
eds indicates that death-related fears are extremely important in this
population group. 51
   Several projects have demonstrated, but not attempted to explain,
that females have higher conscious death anxiety than males ... 53
   A consideration of conscious death anxiety, though of some interest,
is of limited relevance to an understanding of personality structure and
psychopathology. The cornerstone of dynamic psychology is precisely
that strong anxiety does not remain conscious: it is repressed and "pro-
cessed." One of the major steps in the processing of the anxiety source
is to separate or to isolate affect from object. Thus, one can think about
death with only moderate discomfort, and one can experience dis-
placed anxiety with few clues to its true source. A few studies, to be
discussed shortly, have been sensitive to the difference between con-
scious and unconscious death anxiety and have attempted to examine
death fear at unconscious levels. They have used such instruments as
the TAT,t the Rorschach, dream analysis, word-association tests, sen-
tence-completion tests, and tachistoscopic projection and the galvanic
skin response.
DEATH ANXIETY AND PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
   Conscious death anxiety. A few scattered reports attempt to correlate
conscious death anxiety and psychopathology. There is a positive cor-
relation, in student volunteers, between death anxiety and neuroticism
(Eysenck neuroticism scale.)54 Prisoners incarcerated for a "minor" of-
fense (no further details of offense given) when compared with normal
controls have significantly more death anxiety, death preoccupation,
and more fear of funerals and medical diseases and are more often
aware of suppressing thoughts about death. 55 Conscious death anxiety
correlates positively with the MMPI depression scale in aged psychiat-
ric patients; in fact, the correlation was so strong that the investigators
suggested that heightened death anxiety be considered part of the de-
pressive syndrome in the aged. The same study revealed no correlation
between death anxiety and somatic symptomatology (on the Cornell
   • A large study (N=825) reported no male-female differences but a careful inspection
of the data showed that women were less inclined than men to answer unsettling items
on the questionnaire; for example, one item ("Do you vividly imagine yourself as dying
or being dead") was answered by only 78 percent of the women and by 98 percent of the
men.••
   tThematic Apperception Test.
                                                                                     51


                                                         I I DEATH
Medical Index). 56 Possibly somatization emerges in response to, and
acts as a sump for, death anxiety.
   Though studies indicate a lack of overt death anxiety in the normal
aged population/7 those aged who are psychologically immature or
psychiatrically disturbed show evidence of high death anxiety. 58 Ado-
lescents tend to show higher death anxiety than other age groups; and
once again we find that the individuals who give evidence of psycho-
pathology (in this study defined as delinquent acts of significant mag-
nitude to warrant incarceration) express more death anxiety than do
the controls. 59 A study of normal and institutionalized "sub-normal
adolescent girls" demonstrated that the institutionalized population
was more overtly fearful about death. 60 Similarly, another researcher
found that poorly achieving high school girls had considerably greater
fear of death-"often so pervasive that it can be communicated only
indirectly." 61
   Unconscious death anxiety. But these studies of conscious death atti-
tudes and anxiety are of little help in understanding the role of death
anxiety in psychodynamics. Several researchers have accordingly at-
tempted to study unconscious concerns about death. Feifel and his as-
sociates have defined three levels of concern: (1) conscious (measured
by scoring the response to the question, "Are you afraid of your own
death?"); (2) fantasy (measured by coding the positivity or negativity of
responses to the directive, "What ideas or pictures come to your mind
when you think about your death?"); (3) below-level awareness (mea-
sured by mean reaction time to death words on a word-association test
and a color word interference test). 62
   The investigators found that death concerns varied greatly at each of
these levels. On a conscious level, the great majority (over 70 percent)
of individuals denied a fear of death. On the fantasy level, 27 percent
denied death fear, 62 percent answered ambivalently, and 11 percent
gave considerable evidence of death anxiety. At a level below aware-
ness, most of the subjects gave evidence of considerable aversion to
death. The major difference among normals, neurotics, and psychotics
was that psychotic individuals evinced more overall death anxiety than
the others. On the more conscious levels, the older subjects and the
more religious subjects perceived death in a "fairly positive vein, but
succumbed to anxiety at the gut level." 63 Though these studies use
crude instrumentation, nonetheless they do point out the necessity of
studying death concerns at different levels of awareness.
   In an interesting experiment, W. W. Meissner demonstrated the exis-
 tence of significant unconscious anxiety. 64 He tested the galvanic skin
52


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
response (GSR) of normal subjects who were presented with a series of
fifty items: thirty neutral terms and twenty death symbols (for exam-
ple, black, a candle burning out, a journey, a sleeping person, the silent
one, crossing .a bridge). The death symbols evoked a significantly great-
er GSR response than did the control words.
   Klass Magni tested unconscious death anxiety in another way. 65
Death-relevant scenes (pictures of funerals, decayed and mutilated
corpses, and so forth) were projected tachistoscopically in progressive-
ly longer exposures. Magni measured the time required by a subject to
identify the scene, and demonstrated that theology students planning
to enter parish priesthood required significantly less time to identify
the scene (and thus presumably had significantly less unconscious
death anxiety) than did students planning research or teaching careers
where they would be less intimately engaged in ministering to others.
Several studies using interview data 66 or TAT 67 data indicate that indi-
viduals with higher levels of neuroticism have greater death anxiety.
   Studies of unconscious death anxiety in the aged using the TAT and
sentence completion tests indicate that elderly individuals who are as-
signed separate living quarters similar to a familiar setting have signifi-
cantly less death anxiety than those individuals in traditional institu-
tions for the aged. 68 Furthermore, the aged have less unconscious death
anxiety if they are involved in many life activities. 69 Death anxiety on
the TAT in the aged is positively correlated with MMPI neurotic indi-
cators (hypochondriasis, dependency, impulsivity, and depression.)1° A
study of unconscious death anxiety (a sentence-completion projective
technique) in a population of middle-aged to aged adults demonstrated
that the younger adults had more death anxiety than their elderly
cohorts. 71
   If fear of death is a primary source of anxiety, then it should be
found in dreams, where unconscious themes often appear in relatively
undisguised form. A large normative study of dreams indicated that
overt death anxiety was found in 29 percent of dreams. 72 An extensive
study of nightmares revealed that the most common anxiety theme in
the dreams of adults was either dying or being murdered. The other
common themes were also death-linked: some family member or other
individual dying, or the dreamer's life being threatened by an accident
or by someone chasing him or her. 73 Does the amount of conscious
death anxiety correlate with the number of death nightmares? The
studies show conflicting results depending upon the specific death
anxiety scale used. However, a subject who has suffered (especially
when under the age of ten) the death of close friends and relatives is
                                                                        53


                                                          I I DEATH
more likely to have death nightmares. 74 One study reports an intrigu-
ing finding: there is a curvilinear relationship between conscious death
anxiety and death themes in dreams. 75 In other words, those individ-
uals who have very high or very low conscious death anxiety tend to
dream of death. Possibly high conscious anxiety reflects such high un-
conscious anxiety that it cannot be contained and spills over into failed
dreams (nightmares) and into consciousness. Very low conscious death
anxiety (less than one would expect in the average individual) may re-
flect strong unconscious death anxiety which in the waking state is
contained by denial and repression but which in the sleeping state
overwhelms the dream censor.
   In summary the research literature on death anxiety offers some
limited help in increasing our understanding of the role of death fear
in psychopathology and psychotherapy. Most of the research consists
of correlational studies of conscious death anxiety (on crudely con-
structed scales) and a host of demographic and psychometric variables.
These studies demonstrate some positive correlation between high
death anxiety and depression, early loss, lack of religious belief, and
occupational choice. Other studies investigate deeper layers of con-
sciousness and demonstrate that considerable death anxiety lies outside
of awareness; that death anxiety increases as one moves from conscious
to unconscious experience; that the fear of death stalks us in our
dreams; that the aged fear death more if they are psychologically im-
mature, or if they have few life activities in which to engage; and, last-
ly, that death anxiety, both conscious and unconscious, is related to
neuroticism.
       The Inattention to Death in Psychotherapy Theory
                               and Practice
All of the foregoing perspectives on death-cultural tradition, clinical
experience and empirical research-bear strong implications for psy-
chotherapy. The incorporation of death into life enriches life; it en-
ables individuals to extricate themselves from smothering trivialities,
to live more purposefully and more authentically. The full awareness
of death may promote radical personal change. Yet death is a primary
54


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
source of anxiety; it permeates inner experience, and we defend against
it by a number of personal dynamisms. Furthermore, as I shall discuss
in chapter 4, death anxiety dealt with maladaptively results in the vast
variety of signs, symptoms, and character traits we refer to as
"psychopathology."
   Yet despite these compelling reasons, the dialogue of psychotherapy
rarely includes the concept of death. Death is overlooked, and over-
looked glaringly, in almost all aspects of the mental health field: the-
ory, basic and clinical research, clinical reports, and all forms of clinical
practice. The only exception lies in the area in which death cannot be
ignored-the care of a dying patient. The sporadic articles dealing with
death that do appear in the psychotherapy literature are generally in
second- or third-line journals and are anecdotal in form. They are curi-
osities that are peripheral to the mainstream of theory and practice.
CLINICAL CASE REPORTS
   The omission of the fear of death in clinical case reports, to take one
example, is so blatant that one is tempted to conclude that nothing less
than a conspiracy of silence is at work. There are three major strategies
for dealing with death in clinical case reports. First, the authors selec-
tively inattend to the issue and report no material whatsoever pertain-
ing to death. Second, authors may present copious clinical data related
to death but ignore the material completely in their dynamic formula-
tion of the case. This is the situation, for example, in Freud's case his-
tories, and I shall shortly provide evidence of it. Third, authors may
present death-related clinical material but, in a formulation of the case,
translate "death" into a concept compatible with a particular ideologi-
cal school.
   In a widely cited article, "The Attitudes of Psychoneurotics toward
Death," published in a leading journal, two eminent clinicians, Walter
Bromberg and Paul Schilder, present several case histories in which
death plays a prominent role. 76 For example, one female patient devel-
oped acute anxiety after the death of a woman friend for whom she had
had some erotic longings. Although the patient stated explicitly that
her personal fear of death was kindled by watching her friend die, the
authors conclude that "her anxiety reaction was against the uncon-
scious homosexual attachment with which she struggled ... her own
death meant the reunion with the homosexual beloved who had de-
parted ... to die means a reunion with the denied love object."
   Another patient, whose father was an undertaker, described her se-
vere anxiety: "I have always feared death. I was afraid I would wake up
                                                                          55


                                                             I I DEATH
while they were embalming me. I have these queer feelings of immi-
nent death. My father was an undertaker. I never thought of death
while I was with corpses ... but now I feel I want to run .... I think of
it steadily.... I feel as though I was fighting it off." The authors con-
clude that "the anxiety about death is the expression of a repressed
wish to be passive and to be handled by the father-undertaker. In their
view the patient's anxiety is the product of her self-defense against
these dangerous wishes and of her desire for self-punishment because
of her incestuous wish. The other case histories in the same article pro-
vide further examples of translations of death into what the authors
consider to be more fundamental fears: "death means for this boy final
sado-masochistic gratification in a homosexual reunion with the fa-
ther," or "death means for him separation from the mother and an end
to expression of his unconscious libidinal desires."
   Obviously one cannot but wonder why there is such a press for
translation. If a patient's life is curtailed by a fear, let us say, of open
spaces, dogs, radioactive fallout, or if one is consumed by obsessive ru-
minations about cleanliness or whether doors are locked, then it seems
to make sense to translate these superficial concerns into more funda-
mental meanings. But, res ipsa loquitur, a fear of death may be a fear of
death and not translatable into a "deeper" fear. Perhaps, as I shall dis-
cuss later, it is not translation that the neurotic patient needs; he or she
may not be out of contact with reality but instead, through failing to
erect "normal" denial defenses, may be too close to the truth.
CLINICAL RESEARCH
   Inattention to the concept of death has far-reaching implications for
clinical research as well. To take one example, consider the field of
mourning and bereavement. Although many researchers have studied
in painstaking detail the adjustment of the survivors, they have consis-
tently failed to take into consideration that the survivor has not only
suffered an "object loss" but has encountered the loss of himself or her-
self as well. Beneath the grief for the loss of another lies the message,
"If your mother (father, child, friend, spouse) dies, then you will die,
too." (Shortly after a patient of mine lost his father, he had the halluci-
nation of a voice from above booming down to him the words, "You're
next.") In a heavily cited study of the first year of bereavement of wid-
ows, the researcher records statements from the subjects like, "I feel
like I'm walking on the edge of a black pit," or comments to the effect
that they now view the world as an insecure and potentially harmful
place, or that life seems pointless and without purpose, or that they are
56


 2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
 angry but without a focus for that anger. 77 I believe that each of these
 reactions would, if explored in depth, lead an investigator to important
 conclusions about the role of loss as an experience that has the poten-
 tial to facilitate the survivor's encounter with his or her personal death.
 However, the researcher in this study, and in each of the other exten-
 sive studies in bereavement I have read, worked from a different frame
 of reference and accordingly failed to till some rich soil. This failure is
 another sorry example of the impoverishment that ensues when behav-
 ioral science ignores intuitively evident truths. Four thousand years
 ago, in one of the first pieces of written literature, the Babylonian epic
 Gilgamesh, the protagonist knew well that the death of his friend, En-
 kidu, betokened his own death: "Now what sleep is this that has taken
 hold of thee? Thou hast become dark and canst not hear me. When I
 die shall I not be like unto Enkidu? Sorrow enters my heart, I am afraid
 of death." 78
THE CLINICAL PRACTITIONER
   Some therapists state that death concerns are simply not voiced by
their patients. I believe, however, that the real issue is that the thera-
pist is not prepared to hear them. A therapist who is receptive, who in-
quires deeply into a patient's concerns will encounter death continu-
ously in his or her everyday work.
   Patients, given the slightest encouragement, will bring in an extraor-
dinary amount of material related to a concern about death. They dis-
cuss the deaths of parents or friends, they worry about growing old,
their dreams are haunted by death, they go to class reunions and are
shocked by how much everyone else has aged, they notice with an
ache the ascendancy of their children, they occasionally take note, with
a start, that they enjoy old people's sedentary pleasures. They are aware
of many small deaths: senile plaques, liver spots on their skin, gray
hairs, stiff joints, stooped posture, deepening wrinkles. Retirement ap-
proaches, children leave home, they become grandparents, their chil-
dren take care of them, the life cycle envelops them. Other patients
may speak of annihilation fears: the common horrifying fantasy of
some murderous aggressors forcing entry into the home, or fearful re-
actions to television or cinematic violence. The termination work that
occurs in the therapy of every patient is accompanied, if the therapist
will only listen, by undercurrents of concern about death.
   My personal clinical experience is highly corroborative of the ubiq-
uity of death concerns. Throughout the writing of this book I have en-
countered considerable amounts of heretofore invisible clinical materi-
                                                                         57


                                                                I I DEATH
al. Undoubtedly to some extent I have cued patients to provide me
with certain evidence. But it is my belief that, in the main, it was al-
ways there; I was simply not properly tuned in. Earlier in this chapter,
for example, I presented two patients, Joyce and Beth, who had com-
monplace clinical problems involving the establishment and the termi-
nation of interpersonal relationships. On deeper inquiry both women
evinced much concern about existential issues which I would never
have been able to recognize had I not had the appropriate psychologi-
cal set.
   Another example of "tuning in" is offered by a psychotherapist who
attended a Saturday letture I gave on the topic of death anxiety. A few
days later she wrote in a letter:
        ... I did not expect the subject to come up in my work now, since I am a
       counselor at Reed College and our students are usually in good physical
       health. But my first appointment Monday morning was with a student
       who had been raped two months ago. She has been suffering from many
       disagreeable and painful symptoms since then. She made the comment,
       with an embarrassed laugh, "If I'm not dying of one thing, I'm dying of
       another." It was probably at least in part because of your remarks that
       the interview turned towards her fear of dying, and that being raped
       and dying used to be things she thought would happen only to other
       people. She now feels vulnerable and flooded with anxieties that used to
       be suppressed. She seemed to be relieved that it was all right to talk
       about being afraid to die, even if no terminal illness can be found in her
       body.79
   Psychotherapy sessions following even some passing encounter with
death often offer much clinical data. Dreams, of course, are especially
fertile sources of material. For example, one thirty-year-old woman, the
night following the funeral of an old friend, dreamed: 'Tm sitting
there watching TV. The doctor comes over and examines my lungs
with a stethoscope. I get angry and ask him what right he has to do
that. He said I was smoking like a smoke house. He said I have far ad-
vanced 'hourglass' disease of my lungs." The dreamer does not smoke,
but her dead friend smoked three packs a day. Her association to
"hourglass" disease of the lungs was "time is running out." 80
   Denial plays a central role in a therapist's selective inattention to
death in therapy. Denial is a ubiquitous and powerful defense. Like an
aura, it surrounds the affect associated with death whenever it appears.
(One joke from Freud's vast collection has it that a man says to his wife:
"If one of us two dies before the other, I think I'll move to Paris.") 81 De-
nial does not spare the therapist, and in the treatment process the deni-
58


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
al of the therapist and the denial of the patient enter into collusion.
Many therapists, though they have had long years of personal analysis,
have not explored and worked through their personal terror of death;
they phobically avoid the area in their personal lives and selectively
inattend to obvious death-linked material in their psychotherapy
practice.
   In addition to the denial of any single therapist, there is collective
denial in the entire field of psychotherapy. This collective denial may
be best understood by exploring why death has been omitted from for-
mal theories of anxiety. Though anxiety plays an absolutely central role
in both the theory and the everyday practice of dynamic psychothera-
py, there is no place accorded to death in the traditional dynamic the-
ories of anxiety. If we are to alter therapeutic practice, to harness the
clinical leverage that the concept of death provides, it will be necessary
to demonstrate the role of death in the genesis of anxiety. There is no
better way to begin than by tracing the evolution of psychodynamic
concepts of anxiety and attempting to understand the systematic exclu-
sion of the concept of death.
                     Freud: Anxiety without Death
Freud's ideas have so influenced the field that to a great extent the evo-
lution of dynamic thought is the evolution of Freud's thought. Despite
his extraordinary prescience, however, I believe that in the area of
death he had a persistent blind spot which obscured for him some pa-
tently obvious aspects of man's inner world. I shall present some mate-
rial to illustrate the way Freud avoided death in clinical and theoretical
considerations, and then suggest some of the reasons behind this
avoidance.
FREUD'S AVOIDANCE OF DEATH
   Freud's first significant clinical and theoretical contribution appears
in Studies in Hysteria, which he wrote with Josef Breuer in 1895. 82 It is a
fascinating work and merits attention for it illustrates strikingly a se-
lective inattention to death, and it laid the foundation for the exclusion
of death from the entire field of dynamic therapy which it spawned.
The book presents five major cases, one (Anna 0.) by Breuer and four
                                                                         59


                                                           I I DEATH
by Freud. Several other cases, in fragmentary form, flit in and out of
footnotes and discussion sections. Each patient begins therapy with
florid symptoms which include paralysis, anesthesias, pain, tics, fa-
tigue, obsessions, sensations of choking, loss of taste and smell, linguis-
tic disorganization, amnesia, and so forth. From a study of these five
patients Freud and Breuer postulated an etiology of hysteria and a sys-
tematic form of therapy based on that etiology.
   The five patients all suffered from some important emotional trauma
experienced earlier in their lives. Ordinarily, Freud notes, a trauma,
though disturbing, produces no lasting effect because the emotions
aroused by it are dissipated: either they are abreacted (the individual
undergoes a catharsis by expressing the emotion in some effective way)
or worked through in some other way (Freud states that the memory of
the traumas may enter "the great complex of associations, it comes
alongside other experiences" and then is "worn away" or rectified or
subjected to reality testing by, for example, dealing with an insult by
considering one's achievements and strengths). 83
   In these five patients the trauma did not dissipate but instead con-
tinuously haunted the victim. ("The hysteric suffers from reminis-
cences"84). Freud suggested that, in his patients, memory of the trauma
and the attendant emotions were repressed from conscious thought
(the first use of the concept of repression and the unconscious) and
thus were not subject to the normal processes of affect dissipation. The
stifled affect persisted, however, with freshness and strength in the un-
conscious and found some conscious expression through conversion
(hence, "conversion hysteria") to physical symptoms.
   The treatment implications are clear: one must enable the patient to
remember the trauma and to give expression to the strangulated affect.
Freud and Breuer used hypnosis, and later Freud used free association,
to help patients recapture the original offending memory and express
the affect verbally and behaviorally.
   Freud's speculations about affect build-up and dissipation, about the
formation of symptoms, and about a system of therapy resting on these
assumptions are of landmark importance and adumbrate much of the
dynamic theory and therapy that followed him. What is most germane
to my discussion is Freud's view about the source of the dysphoric af-
fect-the nature of the original trauma. The theory of symptoms and
the approach to therapy remain consistent throughout the text, but
Freud's descriptions of the nature of the trauma responsible for the
symptoms undergo a fascinating evolution from the first patient to the
last. (In his introduction he states, "I can give no better advice to any-
60


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
one interested in the development of catharsis into psychoanalysis
than to begin with Studies in Hysteria and thus follow the path which I
myself have trodden.") 85
   In the first cases of the book the traumas seem trivial: it strains belief
that a person's profound neurotic state could result from one's being
chased by a vicious dog, 86 or being hit with a stick by an employer, or
discovering a maid allowing a dog to drink water out of one's glass, 87 or
being in love with one's employer and having to suffer the latter's un-
just reproaches. 88 As the book progresses, Freud's explanations of pre-
cipitating traumas become ever more dazzling in their sophistication:
to him, his patients were, he came to believe, bedeviled by archetypal
concerns worthy of a Greek tragedian's attention-hatred of children
(since they interfered with a wife's ability to minister to a dying hus-
band),89 incestuous activity with a parent/0 a primal scene experience/ 1
and pleasure (and ensuing guilt) at the death of a sister whose husband
the woman patient loved. 92 These latter cases, the footnotes, and
Freud's letters93 all bear evidence of the inexorable direction of Freud's
thinking about the source of anxiety: (1) he gradually shifted the time
of the "real" trauma responsible for anxiety to a period earlier in life;
and (2) he came to view the nature of the trauma as explicitly and ex-
clusively sexual.
   Freud's musings about the emotional traumas of his five patients
gradually developed into a formal theory of anxiety. Anxiety was a sig-
nal of anticipated danger; the seed of anxiety was planted early in life
when an important trauma occurred: the memory of the traumatic
event was repressed, and its attendant affect transformed to anxiety.
An expectation of the trauma's recurrence or of some analogous danger
could evoke anxiety anew.
   What kind of trauma? What events are so fundamentally malignant
that their echoes haunt an individual's entire life? Freud's first answer
stressed the importance of the affect of helplessness. "Anxiety is the
original reaction to helplessness and is reproduced, later on, as a signal
for help in the face of trauma." 94 Then the task is to determine which
situations call forth helplessness. Since the problem of anxiety is the
very heart of psychoanalytic theory, and since Freud boldly altered ba-
sic theory throughout his career, it is not surprising that his statements
on anxiety are many, varied, and at times conflicting. 95 Two primary
origins of anxiety survive Freud's restless sifting: loss of mother (aban-
donment and separation) and loss of the phallus (castration anxiety).
Other major sources include superego or moral anxiety, the fear of
one's own self-destructive tendencies, and the fear of ego disintegra-
                                                                          61


                                                                 1/DEATH
tion-of being overwhelmed by the dark, irrational night forces that
reside within.
   Though Freud often mentioned other sources of anxiety, he placed
his major emphasis on abandonment and castration. He believed that,
in ever-changing guise, these two psychic Katzenjammer Kids bedevil
us throughout our waking lives and, in our sleep, provide the fuel for
our two common nightmares: of falling and of being chased. Always
the archaeologist, always searching for more basic structures, Freud
suggested that castration and separation had a common feature: loss-
loss of love, loss of the ability to unite with mother. Chronologically,
separation occurs first, templated in fact in the trauma of birth-the
first moment of life; but Freud chose to consider castration as the ge-
neric, primary source of anxiety. The earlier separation, he suggested,
primed the individual for castration anxiety which, when it develops,
subsumes the earlier anxiety experiences.
   When one considers the data base (the case material of the patients in
Studies in Hysteria) from which Freud's conclusions about anxiety and
trauma spring, one is struck by an astonishing discrepancy between the
case histories and Freud's conclusions and formulations: death so per-
vades the clinical histories of these patients that only by a supreme effort of in-
attention could Freud have omitted it from his discussion of precipitating trau-
mas. Of the five patients, two are discussed only briefly. (One patient,
Katarina, Freud's waitress at a vacation resort, was treated in a single
session.) The three major patients-Anna 0., Frau Emmy von N., and
Fraulein Elisabeth von R. (the first dynamic case reports in psychiatric
literature)-are remarkable in that their clinical descriptions groan
with references to death. Furthermore, it is likely that, had Freud been
specifically interested in death anxiety, he would have elicited and re-
ported even more material on the theme of death.
   Anna O.'s illness, for example, first developed when her father fell
ill (and succumbed to that illness ten months later). She nurseJ him in-
defatigably at first; but eventually her illness, consisting of bizarre al-
tered states of consciousness, amnesia, linguistic disorganization, an-
orexia, and sensory and muscular conversion symptoms, resulted in
her being removed from contact with her dying father. During the fol-
lowing year her condition deteriorated badly. Breuer noted Anna O's
preoccupation with death. He commented, for example, that, although
she had "bizarre and rapidly fluctuating disturbances in consciousness,
the one thing that nevertheless seemed to remain conscious most of the
time was the fact that her father had died." 96
   During Breuer's hypnotic work with Anna 0., she had terrifying hal-
62


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
lucinations associated with her father's death. While nursing him, she
had once fainted when she imagined she saw him with a death's head.
(During treatment she once looked in the mirror and saw not herself
but her father with a death's head glaring at her.) On another occasion
she hallucinated a black snake coming to attack her father. She tried to
fight the snake, but her arm had fallen asleep, and she hallucinated her
fingers turning to snakes and each fingernail becoming a tiny skull.
Breuer considered these hallucinations emanating from her terror of
death as the primal cause of her illness: "On the last day [of treat-
ment]-by the help of rearranging the room so as to resemble her fa-
ther's sick room-she reproduced the terrifying hallucinations I have
described above and which constituted the root of her whole illness." 97
   Frau Emmy von N., like Anna 0., developed her illness immediately
following the death of the person to whom she was closest-her hus-
band. Freud hypnotized Frau Emmy von N. and asked for important
associations. She reeled off a litany of death-related memories: seeing
her sister in a coffin (at age seven), being frightened by her brother
dressed as a ghost and by siblings throwing dead animals at her, seeing
her aunt in a coffin (at age nine), finding her mother unconscious from
a stroke (age fifteen) and then (at age nineteen) finding her dead, nurs-
ing a brother dying of tuberculosis, mourning (at age nineteen) the
death of her brother, witnessing the sudden death of her husband. In
the first eight pages of the clinical case report there are no fewer than
eleven explicit references to death, dying, or corpses. Throughout the
clinical description Frau Emmy von N. explicitly discusses her perva-
sive fear of death.
   The illness of the third patient, Fraulein Elisabeth von R., incubated
during the eighteen months that she nursed her dying father and wit-
nessed the inexorable deterioration of her family: one sister moved far
away, her mother suffered a severe illness, her father died. Finally, fol-
lowing the death of a much-loved older sister, Fraulein Elisabeth's ill-
ness erupted in full force. In the course of therapy Freud, in order to
accelerate the recall of old memories and affect, assigned the task of
visiting her sister's grave (in much the same way Breuer had re-ar-
ranged his consulting room to resemble the room in which Anna O's
father had died).
   Freud believed that anxiety is called forth by a situation that evokes
an earlier, long-forgotten situation of terror and helplessness. Surely
the death-linked traumas of these patients evoked in them deep feel-
ings of terror and helplessness. But in his denouement of each case
Freud either neglects entirely the theme of death or simply calls atten-
                                                                       63


                                                                   I I DEATH
tion to the generalized stress caused by each patient's loss. His formula-
tions focus on the erotic components of each patient's trauma.,. Thus,
when Fraulein Elisabeth's sister died, Freud helped her to recognize
that, in the pit of her mind, she rejoiced (and subsequently was over-
come with guilt) because her sister's husband, whom she coveted, was
now free to marry her. An important discovery: the unconscious, a resi-
due of primitive wishes buried in the cellar of the mind because they
were unfit for the sunlight, escaped briefly into consciousness and
caused great anxiety which was ultimately bound by conversion
symptomatology.
   No doubt Freud uncovered, in each of his patients, important con-
flicts. It is what he omitted that bears scrutiny. The death of a parent, a
spouse, or some close associate is more than generalized stress; it is
more than loss of an important object. It is a knock at the door of deni-
aL If, as Freud speculated, Fraulein Elisabeth thought, even for a fleet-
ing moment, when her sister died, "Now her husband is free again,
and I can be his wife," then most certainly she also shuddered with the
thought, "If my darling sister dies, then I, too, will die." Like Fraulein Elisa-
beth at her sister's death so Anna 0. at her father's or Frau Emmy von
N. at her husband's: each must have caught, at a deep level and just for
an instant, a glimpse of her own death.
   In his subsequent formulations regarding the sources of anxiety,
Freud, in a most curious fashion, continued to overlook death. He set-
tled on loss: castration and abandonment-the loss of the penis and the
loss of love. His posture here is uncharacteristic. Where is the intrepid
archaeological excavator? Freud always drilled for bedrock-for the
earliest origins-the dawn of life-the ways of primitive man-the
antediluvian primal horde-the fundamental drives and instincts. Yet
before death he pulled up short. Why did he not take one more obvi-
ous step toward the common denominator of abandonment and castra-
tion? Both concepts rest on ontological bedrock Abandonment is inex-
tricably entangled with death: the abandoned primate always perishes;
the fate of the outcast is invariably social death followed quickly by
physical death. Castration, if taken in the figurative sense, is synony-
mous with annihilation; if taken literally (and Freud, alas, meant it lit-
erally), then it also leads to death since the castrated individual cannot
thrust his seed into the future, cannot escape extinction.
   • Robert Jay Lifton in The Broken Connection (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1979)
makes almost precisely the same point about another of Freud's important cases, Little
Hans, and concludes that libido theory "dedeathifies" death. As Lifton's book unfortu-
nately appeared after my book was completed I was unable to assimilate his rich insights
in any meaningful way. It is a thoughtful, important work which bears careful reading.
64


 2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
    In "Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety," Freud briefly considered
 the role of death in the etiology of the neuroses but dismissed it as su-
 perficial (I shall later discuss the topsy-turvy analytic view of what con-
 stitute "depth" and "superficiality"). In a passage that has been quoted
 countless times by theoreticians, Freud describes why he omits the fear
 of death from consideration as a primary source of anxiety.
        It would seem highly improbable that a neurosis could come into being
        merely because of the objective presence of danger, without any partici-
        pation of the deeper levels of the mental apparatus. But the unconscious
        seems to contain nothing that could give any content to our concept of
        the annihilation of life. Castration can be pictured on the basis of the
        daily experience of the faeces being separated from the body or on the
        basis of losing the mother's breast at weaning. But nothing resembling
        death can ever have been experienced; or if it has, as in fainting, it has
        left no observable traces behind. I am therefore inclined to adhere to the
        view that the fear of death should be regarded as analogous to the fear of
        castration and that the situation to which the ego is reacting is one of be-
        ing abandoned by the protecting super-ego-the powers of destiny-so
        that it has no longer any safeguard against all the dangers that surround
        it.•s
   The logic falters badly here. First, Freud insists that, since we have
had no experience of death, it can have no representation in the uncon-
scious. Have we had an experience with castration? No direct experi-
ence, Freud acknowledges; but he states that we experience other losses
that are experientially equivalent: the daily separation of feces or
weaning experience. Surely the feces-weaning-castration linkage is not
more logically compelling than the concept of an innate, intuitive
awareness of death. In fact, the argument whereby death is replaced by
castration as a primary source of anxiety is so untenable that I feel un-
comfortable attacking it, much as if I were fighting an obviously crip-
pled opponent. For example, consider the obvious point that women,
too, have anxiety; the gymnastic efforts required to apply castration
theory to women are truly the supreme high jinks of analytic
meta psychology.
   Melanie Klein was explicitly critical of Freud's curious inversion of
primacy. "The fear of death reinforces castration fear and is not analo-
gous to it ... since reproduction is the essential way of counteracting
death, the loss of the genital would mean the end of the creative power
which preserves and continues life." Klein also disagreed with Freud's
position that there is no fear of death in the unconscious. Accepting
Freud's later postulate that there is, in the deepest layers of the uncon-
scious, a death instinct (Thanatos) she argued that "a fear of death, also
residing in the unconscious, operates in opposition to this instinct.''••
                                                                                 65


                                                                          !/DEATH
    Despite the dissent of Klein, as well as of Rank and Adler and others
who mounted guerrilla opposition, Freud persisted in his views and
begat a cult of death denial in generations of therapists. The major ana-
lytic textbooks reflect and perpetuate this trend. Otto Fenichel states
that "because the idea of death is subjectively inconceivable, every fear
of death covers other unconscious ideas." 100 Robert Waelder omits a
consideration of death entirely; 101 while Ralph Greenson briefly dis-
cusses death from the perspective of Thanatos, Freud's death instinct,
and then dismisses it as a curiosity-a bold but unstable theory. 102 Only
gradually and by workers outside the Freudian tradition (or who rapid-
ly found themselves outside) was the necessary corrective supplied.
    Why did Freud exclude death from psychodynamic theory? Why did
he not consider the fear of death as a primary source of anxiety? Obvi-
ously the exclusion is not mere oversight: the fear of death is neither
profound nor an elusive concept; and Freud could hardly have failed to
consider (and then to dismiss deliberately) the issue. He is explicit
about it in 1923: "The high-sounding phrase 'every fear is ultimately
the fear of death' has hardly any meaning and at any rate cannot be jus-
tified."103 His argument proceeds along the same unconvincing lines as
before: that it is not truly possible to conceive of death-some part of
the ego always remains a living spectator. Once again Freud arrives at
the unsatisfying conclusion that "the fear of death, like the fear of con-
science, is a development of the fear of castration." 104
    Note, too, that Freud's inattention to death is limited to discussions
of the formal theory of anxiety, repression, and the unconscious: in
short, to the inner workings-the cogs, bearings, and energy cell-of
the mental mechanism.,. Wherever he allowed himself free reign, he
speculated boldly and energetically about death. For example, in a
short, penetrating essay written at the end of the First World War,
"Our Attitude toward Death," he discussed the denial of death and
man's attempt to vanquish death through the creation of immortality
myths. Earlier I cited some of his comments about how life's transience
increases its poignance and richness. He was mindful of the role death
plays in the shaping of life:
         Would it not be better to give death the place in reality and in our
         thoughts which is its due, and to give a little more prominence to the
    • At the age of sixty-four, in Beyond the Pleasure Principle, Freud made a place for death
in his model of the mind; but even in this formulation he spoke not of a primary dread of
death but instead of a will to death-Thanatos was designated as one of the two primary
drives.'••
66


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
       unconscious attitude towards death which we have hitherto so carefully
       suppressed. This hardly seems an advance to higher achievement, but
       rather in some respects a backward step-a regression; but it has the ad-
       vantage of taking the truth more into account, and of making life more
       tolerable for us once again. To tolerate life remains, after all, the first
       duty of all living beings. Illusion becomes valueless if it makes this
       harder for us. We recall the old saying: "Si vis pacem, para bellum." If
       you want to preserve peace, arm for war. It would be in keeping with
       the times to alter it: "Si vis vitam, para mortem." If you want to endure
       life, prepare yourself for death. 106
   "If you want to endure life, prepare yourself for death." Freud be-
lieved that the task of a therapist was to help a patient endure life.
Freud's entire therapeutic career was devoted to that end. Yet, aside
from this maxim, he remained mute forever about preparing for death,
about the role of the concept of death in psychotherapy. Why?
   One can go only so far in pointing out what Freud overlooked, in
commenting upon his blind spots, until one begins to look back uneasi-
ly over one's shoulder. Perhaps his vision was greater than ours, it was
in many other respects. Perhaps the issue is so simplistic that he never
felt the necessity to provide the full argument for his position. We are
well advised, I believe, to consider carefully the reasons behind Freud's
position. I believe he omitted death from dynamic theory for unsound
reasons that flow from two sources: one, an outmoded theoretical mod-
el of behavior; and the other, a relentless quest for personal glory.
FREUD'S INATTENTION TO DEATH: THEORETICAL REASONS
   When Freud was seventy-five years old, he was asked who had most
influenced him. Without hesitation he answered, as he always had an-
swered, "Briicke." Ernst Briicke had been Freud's physiology professor
in medical school and his mentor during his brief research career in
neurophysiology. Briicke was a forbidding man, with a Prussian iron
will and steel-blue eyes, much feared by Viennese medical students.
(At examination time each student was allotted several minutes for oral
questioning. If a student missed the first ql.!estion on an examination,
Briicke would sit for the rest of the allotted time in stern silence imper-
vious to the desperate entreaties of the student and the dean, who was
present.) In Freud, Briicke finally found a student worthy of his inter-
est, and the two worked closely together in the neurophysiological lab-
oratory for several years.
   Briicke was a primary force behind the ideological school of biology
that was founded by Hermann von Helmholtz, and that dominated
Western European medical and basic scientific research in the latter
                                                                               67


                                                                  !/DEATH
part of the nineteenth century. The basic Helmholtzian position,
Briicke's legacy to Freud, was clearly delineated in a statement by an-
other of the founders, Emil du-Bois Reymond:
         No other forces than the common physical-chemical ones are active
         within the organism; that, in those cases which cannot at the time be ex-
         plained by these forces one has either to find the specific way or form of
         their action by means of the physical-mathematical method, or to assume
         new forces equal in dignity to the chemical-physical forces inherent in
         matter, reducible to the force of attraction and repulsion. 107
   The Helmholtzian position is thus deterministic and antivitalistic.
Man is a machine activated by chemical-physical mechanisms. Brticke
stated in his 1874 Lectures in Physiology that, though organisms differ
from machines in assimilative power, they are nonetheless phenomena
of the physical world, moved by forces according to the principle of
the conservation of energy. The number of forces propelling the organ-
ism seems large only in the presence of ignorance. "Progress in knowl-
edge reduces them to two-attraction and repulsion. All this applies as well
to the organism, man" (my italics). 108
   Freud adopted this mechanistic, Helmholtzian model of the organ-
ism and applied it to constructing a model of the mind. At seventy he
said, "My life has been aimed at one goal, 'to infer how the mental ap-
paratus is constructed and how forces interplay and counteract in
it.'" 109 Hence, it is apparent what Freud owed Bri.icke: Freudian theory,
often ironically assailed as irrational, is deeply rooted in traditional
biophysical-chemical doctrine. Freud's dual instinct theory, the theory
of libidinal energy conservation and transformation, and his unyield-
ing determinism antedate his decision to become a psychiatrist: all
have their anlage in Bri.icke's mechanistic view of man.
   With this background in mind, we may return, with greater under-
standing, to the question of Freud's exclusion of death from his formu-
lations of human behavior. Duality-the existence of two inexorably
opposed basic drives-was the bedrock upon which Freud built his me-
tapsychological system. Helmholtzian doctrine called for duality. Re-
call Bri.icke's statement: the fundamental forces active within the or-
ganism are two-attraction and repulsion. The theory of repression,
the starting point of psychoanalytic thought, calls for a dualistic sys-
tem: repression requires conflict between two fundamental forces.
Throughout Freud's career he attempted to identify the pair of basic
antagonistic drives that propel the human organism. His first proposal
was "hunger and love," as incarnated in the struggle between the pres-
68


 2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
ervation of the individual organism and the perpetuation of the spe-
cies. Most analytic theory rests on this antithesis: the struggle between
ego and libido instincts was, in Freud's earlier theory, the cause of re-
pression and the source of anxiety. Later, for reasons not relevant to
this discussion, he realized that this duality was untenable, and he es-
poused another dualism: a fundamental dualism grounded in life it-
self-between life and death, Eros and Thanatos. Freudian metapsy-
chology and psychotherapy, however, are based on the first dual
instinct theory; neither Freud nor his students (with the single excep-
tion of Norman 0. Brown 110 ) reformulated his work on the basis of life-
death duality; and most of his followers discarded the second instinct
theory because it led to a position of great therapeutic pessimism. They
either remained with the first libido-ego preservation dialectic or drift-
ed into a Jungian instinctual monism-a position that undermines the
theory of repression.
   Death is not yet; it is an event-to-be, an event located in the future.
To imagine death, to be anxious about it, requires a complex mental ac-
tivity-the planning and the projection of self into the future. In
Freud's deterministic schema the unconscious forces that clash and
whose vector determines our behavior are primitive and instinctual.
There is no place in the psychic power cell for complex mental acts
where the future is imagined and feared. Freud is close to Nietzsche's
position, which considers conscious deliberation entirely superfluous
to the production of behavior. Behavior, according to Nietzsche, is de-
termined by unconscious mechanical forces: conscious consideration
follows behavior rather than precedes it; one's sense of governing one's
behavior is entirely illusion. One only imagines oneself to be choosing
behavior in order to satisfy one's will to power, one's need to perceive
oneself as an autonomous, deciding being.
   Death, then, can play no role in Freud's formal dynamic theory.
Since it is a future event that has never been experienced and cannot
be truly imagined, it cannot exist in the unconscious and thus cannot
influence behavior. It has no place in a view of behavior reducible to
the opposition of two opposing primal instincts. Freud became a pris-
oner of his own deterministic system and could discuss the role that
death plays in the generation of anxiety and in man's perspective on
life in only one of two ways: he could work outside his formal system
(in footnotes or "off the record" essays like "Thoughts for the Times on
War and Death" 111 and "The Theme of the Three Caskets" 112 ) or he
could cram death into his system by either subsuming the fear of death
under some more primal (castration) fear or by considering the will to
                                                                        69


                                                             !/DEATH
death as one of the two fundamental drives underlying all behavior. To
proclaim death a fundamental drive does not solve the problem: it fails
to consider death as a future event, it overlooks the importance in life of
death as a beacon, a destination, a final terminal that has the power ei-
ther of stripping life of all meaning or of beckoning one into an au-
thentic form of being.
FREUD'S INATTENTION TO DEATH: PERSONAL REASONS
   To discover why Freud continued to cling to a theoretical system that
obviously cramped his soaring intellect and forced him into contorted
positions, I must turn to a brief study of Freud the man. The work of
artist, mathematician, geneticist, or novelist speaks for itself; it is a lux-
ury-often an entertaining, interesting luxury, occasionally an intel-
lectually enlightening one-to study the personal lives and motiva-
tions of artists and scientists. But when one considers a theory that
purports to lay bare the deepest levels of human behavior and motiva-
tion, and when the data supporting that theory emanate, in large part,
from the self-analysis of one man, then it becomes not a luxury but a
necessity to study that man as deeply as possible. Fortunately there is
no scarcity of data: probably more is known about the person of Freud
than about any other modern historical figure (with the possible excep-
tion of Woody Allen).
   Indeed, there is so much biographical material on Freud-ranging
from Ernest Jones's exhaustive three-volume, 1,450-page The Life and
Work of Sigmund Freud, 113 to lay biographies, 114 published recollections of
former patients, 115 to volume after volume of published correspon-
dence116-that one may, with careful picking and choosing, defend any
number of outrageous hypotheses about his character structure. There-
fore, caveat emptor.
   I believe that there is much to suggest that at the core of Freud's con-
suming determination was his unquenchable passion to attain great-
ness. Jones's biography centers on that theme. Freud was born in a caul
(an unbroken amniotic sac)-an event that in folklore has always pre-
dicted fame. His family believed that he was destined for fame: his
mother, who never doubted it, called him "my golden Siggy" and fa-
vored him above all her children. He wrote later: "A man who has
been the indisputable favorite of his mother keeps for life the feeling
of a conqueror, that confidence of success that often induces real suc-
cess."117 The belief was fanned by early prophecies: one day in a pastry
shop, an elderly stranger informed Freud's mother that she had
brought a great man into the world; a minstrel in an amusement park,
70


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
selected Freud from among the other children and predicted that he
would one day become a government minister. Freud's obvious intel-
lectual gifts also reinforced the belief; he always stood at the head of
his class at the gymnasium-in fact, according to Jones, he occupied
such a privileged place that he was hardly ever questioned. 118
   It was not long before Freud ceased to question his destiny. In his
adolescence he wrote a boyhood friend that he had received an out-
standing grade on a composition, and continued: "You didn't know
you were exchanging letters with a German stylist. You had better keep
them carefully-one never knows." 119 The most interesting statement
in this regard is to be found in a letter to his fiancee written when he
was twenty-eight years old (and had yet to enter the field of psychiatry!):
       I have just carried out one resolution which one group of people, as yet
       unborn and fated to misfortune, will feel acutely. Since you can't guess
       whom I mean I will tell you: they are my biographers. I have destroyed
       all my diaries of the past fourteen years, with letters, scientific notes and
       the manuscripts of my publications. Only family letters were spared.
       Yours, my dear one, were never in danger. All my old friendships and
       associations passed again before my eyes and mutely met their doom ...
       all my thoughts and feelings about the world in general, and in particu-
       lar how it concerned me have been declared unworthy of survival. They
       must now be thought all over again. And I had jotted down a great deal.
       But the stuff simply enveloped me, as the sand does the Sphinx, and
       soon only my nostrils would show above the mass of paper. I cannot
       leave here and cannot die before ridding myself of the disturbing
       thought of who might come by the old papers. Besides, everything that
       fell before the decisive break in my life, before our coming together and
       my choice of calling, I have put behind me: it has long been dead and it
       shall not be denied an honorable burial. Let the biographers chaff; we
       won't make it too easy for them. Let each one of them believe he is right
       in his "Conception of the Development of the Hero": even now I enjoy
       the thought of how they will all go astray. 120
   In his quest for greatness Freud searched for the great discovery. His
early letters describe a dizzying profusion of ideas that he entertained
and discarded. He, according to Jones, just missed greatness by not pur-
suing his early neurohistological work to its logical conclusion: the es-
tablishment of the neurone theory. He once again missed it in his work
with cocaine. Freud described this incident in a letter that begins: "I
may here go back a little and explain how it was the fault of my fiancee
that I was not already famous at an early age." 121 Freud continues, men-
tioning how one day he had casually mentioned to a physician friend,
Karl Koller, his own observation of cocaine's anesthetic properties and
then had left town for a long visit with his fiancee. By the time Freud
                                                                                  71


                                                                !/DEATH
returned, Koller had already conducted decisive surgical experiments
and gained fame as the discoverer of local anesthesia.
   Few men have been endowed with intellectual powers comparable
to Freud's; he had great imagination, limitless energy, and indomitable
courage. Yet as he entered full professional adulthood he found his
path to success unfairly and capriciously blocked. Briicke had to inform
Freud that, because of anti-Semitism in Vienna, there was virtually no
hope of his having a successful academic career: university support,
recognition, promotion were all closed to him. Freud, at the age of
twenty-seven, was forced to abandon his research and earn his living
as a practicing physician. He studied psychiatry and entered private
medical practice. The "great discovery" was now his only chance of
achieving fame.
   Freud's sense that time and opportunity were slipping away no
doubt explains his injudiciousness in the cocaine incident. He read that
South American natives gained strength from chewing the cocaine
plant; he introduced cocaine into his clinical practice and, in an address
to the Viennese Medical Society, lauded the drug's beneficial effects on
depression and fatigue. He prescribed cocaine for many of his patients
and urged friends (even his fiancee) to use it. When, as they soon did,
the first reports of cocaine addiction appeared, Freud's credibility be-
fore the Viennese Medical Society plummeted. (This incident accounts,
at least in some small part, for the Viennese academic community's lack
of responsiveness to Freud's later discoveries.)
   Psychology began to absorb him completely. Unraveling the struc-
ture of the mind became, as Freud put it, his mistress. He soon generat-
ed a comprehensive theory of the psychogenesis of hysteria. His hopes
for glory depended on the success of this theory; when contradictory
clinical evidence appeared, he was crushed. Freud described this set-
back in a letter to his friend Wilhelm Fliess in 1897: "The hope of eter-
nal fame was so beautiful, and so was that of certain wealth, complete
independence ... all that depended on whether hysteria succeeded or
not."122
   Piecemeal observations were of little import. Freud's quarry was
nothing less than an all-encompassing model of the mind. In 1895
when still midway between neurophysiologist and psychiatrist, Freud
felt that the discovery of a model of the mind was at hand. He wrote in
a letter:
       The barriers suddenly lifted, the veils dropped, and it was possible to see
       from the details of neurosis all the way to the very conditioning of con-
       sciousness. Everything fell into place, the cogs meshed, the thing really
72


2 I Life, Death, and Anxiety
       seemed to be a machine ;.,hich in a moment would run of itself. The
       three systems of neurones, the "free" and "bound" states of quantity, the
       primary and secondary processes, the main trend and the compromise
       trend of the nervous system, the two biological rules of attention and de-
       fense, the indications of quality, reality, and thought, the state of the
       psychosexual group, the sexual determination of repression, and finally
       the factors determining consciousness as a perceptual function-the
       whole thing held together, and still does. I can naturally hardly contain
       myself with delight. 123
   For the discovery to satisfy Freud's requirements fully, two features
were necessary: (1) that the model of the mind be a comprehensive one
that met Helmholtzian scientific requirements; and (2) that it be an
original discovery. The Freudian basic schema of the mind: the exis-
tence of repression, the relationship between conscious and uncon-
scious, the basic biological substrate of thought and affect was a cre-
ative synthesis-not novel in its components (Schopenhauer and
Nietzsche had blazed a bold trail) but novel in its thoroughness and in
its applicability to many human activities, from dreaming and fantasy
to behavior, symptom formation, and psychosis. (Of his predecessors
Freud somewhere said, "Many people have flirted with the uncon-
scious, but I was the first to marry it.") The energy component of
Freud's model (the sexual force or libido)-a constant amount of ener-
gy that proceeds through predetermined, well-defined stages of devel-
opment during infancy and childhood, that may be bound or unbound,
that may be cathected onto objects, that may overflow, be dammed up,
or be displaced, that is the source of thought, behavior, anxiety, and
symptoms-is entirely original; it was the big discovery, and Freud
clung to it fiercely. For the sake of the libido theory he sacrificed his re-
lationships with his most promising disciples, who deviated because
they refused to accept his absolute insistence on the new discovery-
the central role of libido in human motivation.
   Obviously the role of death in human behavior either as a source of
anxiety or as a determinant of motivation had little appeal to Freud. It
met none of his personal dynamic requirements: it was not an instinct
(though Freud in 1920 was to postulate that it was) and did not fit into
a mechanistic Helmholtzian model. Nor was it novel: it was old hat,
Old Testament, in fact; and it was not Freud's aim to join a long proces-
sion of thinkers stretching back to the beginning of time. "Eternal
fame," as he was wont to put it, did not lie there. Eternal fame would
be his from discovering a heretofore unknown source of human moti-
vation: the libido. There seems little question that Freud correctly de-
lineated an important factor in human behavior. Freud's was an error
                                                                              73


                                                         II DEATH
of overcathexis: his fierce investment in the primacy of libido was
overdetermined; he elevated one aspect of human motivation to a posi-
tion of absolute primacy and exclusivity and under that aspect sub-
sumed everything human, for all individuals and for all times.
COUNTER THEORIES
   Counter theories soon appeared. Freud's most creative students took
issue with libido theory; and by 1910, Carl Jung, Alfred Adler, and Otto
Rank had all chosen to leave the good graces of the master rather than
accept his mechanistic, dual-instinct view of human nature. Each of
these defectors proposed another source of motivation. Jung posited a
spiritual life-force monism. Adler emphasized the child's concern
about survival and his or her smallness and helplessness in the face of
a macroscopic adult world and an enveloping universe. Rank stressed
the importance of death anxiety and suggested that the human being
was ever twisting between two fears-the fear of life (and its intrinsic
isolation) and the fear of death. These viewpoints, and the contribu-
tions of such latter-day theoreticians as Fromm, May, Tillich, Kaiser,
and Becker, all supplement but do not replace the Freudian structural
theory. Freud's great contribution was his formulation of a dynamic
model of the mind. To introduce death, both a fear of death and an em-
bracement of death, into Freud's dynamic model is merely to reintro-
duce it: death has always been there, beneath castration, beneath sepa-
ration and abandonment. In this one instance Freud and the
subsequent analytic tradition remained too superficial; subsequent
theorists have provided a corrective force and so served to deepen our
view of the human being.
74


                 CHAPTER 3
      The Concept of Death
                     in Children
OuR         CONCERNS about death and om modes of dealing with
death anxiety are not surface phenomena that are easy either to delin-
eate or to apprehend. Nor do they arise de novo in adulthood. Rather,
they are deeply rooted in the past and extensively transfigured
through a lifetime preoccupied with security and survival. The study of
the child provides an unparalleled opportunity to study, in pristine
form, the human being's grapple with death. To study the child's con-
frontation with mortality, the child's recognition of death, his or her
terror, evasions and fortifications, and subsequent development in the
face of the fear of death is the purpose of this chapter.
  There is to my mind a marked discrepancy between the importance
of death to the child and the attention accorded death in child develop-
mental scholarship. The relevant literature is meager and, when com-
pared with the voluminous literature on other child-development is-
sues, seems at best perfunctory. Empirical studies of the child's concept
of death are particularly rare; psychoanalytically oriented clinicians
have on occasion attempted to study the issue but, as we shall see, with
a bias that often undermines accuracy of observation. Furthermore,
                                                                       75


                                                              I I DEATH
much of the pertinent material is generally found in old publications
often out of the mainstream of the child-development or the child psy-
chiatric literature. We owe much to Sylvia Anthony, who so ably re-
viewed and analyzed the research and observational literature in her
monograph The Discovery of Death in Childhood and After. 1
  Both my clinical work and survey of the work of others lead me to
several conclusions:
   1. When behavioral scientists choose to investigate the issue closely, they
      invariably discover that children are extraordinarily preoccupied with
      death. Children's concerns about death are pervasive and exert far-
      reaching influence on their experiential worlds. Death is a great enigma
      to them, and one of their major developmental tasks is to deal with fears
      of helplessness and obliteration, whereas sexual matters are secondary
      and derivative. 2
   2. Not only are children profoundly concerned with death, but these con-
      cerns begin at an earlier age than is generally thought.
   3. Children go through an orderly progression of stages in awareness of
      death and in the methods they use to deal with their fear of death.
   4. Children's coping strategies are invariably denial-based: it seems that we
      do not, perhaps cannot, grow up tolerating the straight facts about life
      and death.
           Pervasiveness of Death Concern in Children
Freud believed that the silent, sexual researches, the preoccupation
with the question Whence? was a pervasive concern of children and
constituted the foundation of the generation gap existing between
child and adult. There is ample evidence, however, that the question
Whither? also intensely occupies one's mind as a child and buzzes in
one's ear throughout life: one can face it, fear it, ignore it, repress it,
but one cannot be free of it.
   Few parents or observers of young children have not been surprised
by the emergence of sudden, unexpected questions from a child about
death. Once, when my five-year-old son and I were strolling silently
along the beach, he suddenly turned his face up to me and said, "You
know, both my grandfathers died before I ever met them." It seemed
like a "tip of the iceberg" statement. I was certain that he had long
pondered the issue silently. I asked him, as gently as I could, how often
76


3 I The Concept of Death in Children
he thought about things like that, about death, and I was staggered
when he replied, in a strangely adult voice, "I never stop thinking
about it."
   Another time on the occasion of his brother's departure to college he
commented artlessly, "There's just three of us at home now, you and
me and Mommy. I wonder who will be the first to die?"
   A four-and-one-half-year-old child said suddenly to her father, "Ev-
ery day I'm afraid of dying; I wish I'd never grow old for then I'd never
die." 3 A three-and-one-half-year-old girl asked to have a stone put on
her head so that she would stop growing and wouldn't have to grow
old and die. 4 A little girl four years old wept for twenty-four hours
when she learned that all living things die. Her mother was unable to
calm her by any other means than a silent promise that she, the little
girl, would never die. 5 A few days after the death of her paternal
grandmother, a four-year-old child came into the kitchen of the fam-
ily's apartment and saw on the table a dead goose whose bloody head
hung down motionless from the long neck. The child, who had heard
of the death of her grandmother but had shown no special reaction,
now looked anxiously for a short time at the goose and said to her
mother, "Is that what you call dead?" 6
   Erik Erikson reports the case of a four-year-old child whose grand-
mother died, and who had an epileptiform attack the night after he
saw her coffin. A month later he found a dead mole, asked about death,
and again had convulsions. Two months later he had a third series of
convulsions after accidentally crushing a butterfly in his hand. 7
   The artless nature of a child's questions can take one's breath away.
The young child asks straight out, "When are you going to die?" "How
old are you?" "How old are people when they die?" The child asserts,
"I want to live to be a thousand years old. I want to live to be the oldest
person on earth." These are thoughts of an age of innocence and may
be stimulated by a death-the death of a grandparent, an animaL per-
haps even a flower or a leaf; but often they arise unprompted by any
external stimulus: the child merely vents the internal concerns upon
which he or she has long meditated. Later, as the child learns to see the
"emperor's new clothes," he or she will also come to believe that death
is a matter of no great concern.
   By administering a story-completion test to ninety-eight children,
ages five to ten, Anthony has provided an objective measure of chil-
dren's death concern. 8 The stories were open-ended and without ex-
plicit reference to death. (Example: "When the boy went to bed at
nighttime, what did he think about?" or, "A boy went to school; when
                                                                        77


                                                           !/DEATH
playtime came, he didn't play with the others but stayed all alone in
the corner. Why?") In completing the stories, the children evince con-
siderable preoccupation with death or annihilation. Approximately 50
percent of the children referred in their story completions to death, fu-
nerals, killings, or ghosts. When slightly inferential answers were also
included ("He got run over," or "She lost one of her children") the
proportion rose to over 60 percent. For example, children answered the
question, "When the boy went to bed at nighttime, what did he think
about?" with such responses as, "Someone would come in his room and
kill him,'' or, "Snow White. I haven't seen her but I've seen her dead in
a story book," or, "Someone was coming into his house, his father died,
and then he died too." One story told of a magic fairy asking a child if
he wanted to be grown up or remain young for a long time, perhaps
forever. Contrary to common belief that the child is impatient to grow
up and become strong and effective, over 35 percent of the children ex-
pressed in their story completions a preference for staying young, since
they linked growing old to death.
              Concept of Death: Developmental Stages
Thus, with ample evidence of children's concern with death, I shall
consider the ontogeny of the concept of death. Many investigators
have noted that children's thoughts and fears about death and their
methods of coping with that fear are specific to certain stages of
development.
IMPEDIMENTS TO KNOWING WHAT THE CHILD KNOWS ABOUT DEATH
  There is a great deal that stands in the way of our knowing what the
very young child knows about death; consequently much controversy
exists in the field.
   Lack of Language and Capacity for Abstract Thought. The very young
child's lack of language is a formidable barrier to adults' understanding
the child's inner experience. Therefore, assumptions, often highly bi-
ased ones, are made by professionals about what the child knows and
does not know. Another factor is that developmentalists, especially
Jean Piaget, have demonstrated that very young children lack the ca-
pacity for abstract thought. Even at ten years old the child is in a stage
78


3 I The Concept of Death in Children
of concrete mental operations and is just beginning to take proper ac-
count of what is "potential" or "possible." 9 Since death, one's personal
death, being and nonbeing, consciousness, finality, eternity, and the
future are all abstract concepts, many developmental psychologists
have concluded that young children have no accurate concept of death
whatsoever.
  Freud's Stand. Another important factor influencing professional
views about the young child's concept of death has been the strong
stand of Freud, who was convinced that the young child does not grasp
the true implications of death. Since Freud considered the very early
years of life as the ones most instrumental in shaping character, it was
precisely for this reason that he considered death as an unimportant
motif in psychic development. These passages from The Interpretation of
Dreams convey his position:
      ... the child's idea of being "dead" has nothing much in common with
      ours apart from the word. Children know nothing of the horrors of de-
      cay, of freezing in the ice-cold grave, of the terrors of eternal nothing-
      ness-ideas which grown-up people find it so hard to tolerate, as is
      proved by all myths of the future life. The fear of death has no meaning
      to a child; hence it is that he will play with the dreadful word and use it
      as a threat against a playmate: "If you do that again, you'll die like
      Franz!" ... it was actually possible for a child who was over eight years
      old at the time coming home from a visit to the Natural History Museum
      to say to his mother: ''I'm so fond of you mummy: when you die I'll have
      you stuffed and I'll keep you in this room so that I can see you all the
      time." So little resemblance is there between a child's idea of being dead
      and our own, I was astonished to hear a highly intelligent boy of ten re-
      mark after the sudden death of his father: "I know father's dead, but
      what I can't understand is why he doesn't come home to supper."
         To children, who, moreover, are spared the sight of the scenes of suf-
      fering which precede death, being "dead" means approximately the
      same as being "gone"-not troubling the survivors anymore. A child
      makes no distinction as to how this absence is brought about: whether it
      is due to a journey, to a dismissal, to an estrangement, or to death ....
      When people are absent children do not miss them with any great inten-
      sity; many mothers learn this to their sorrow when, after being away
      from home for some weeks on a summer holiday, they are met on their
      return by the news that the children have not once asked after their
      mummy. If their mother does actually make the journey to that "undis-
      cover'd country, from whose bourn no traveller returns," children seem
      at first to have forgotten her, and it is only later on that they begin to
      call their dead mother to mind. 10
  Thus, in Freud's view, the child, even at the age of eight or nine,
knows little (and, hence, fears little) about death. Freud, in his formula-
                                                                              79


                                                            I I DEATH
tions about the child's basic concerns, relegated death to a position rel-
atively late in development and assigned sexual concerns an earlier
and primary position. His conclusions about the role of death in per-
sonal development were highly influential and resulted in the issue
being prematurely sealed off for a generation. Not only are there, as I
discussed in the last chapter, personal and theoretical reasons for
Freud's error, but methodological ones as well: he never worked direct-
ly with young children.
   Adult Bias. Bias is another important barrier to knowing what the
child knows of death. Whether the study is observationaL psychomet-
ric, or projective, an adult must collect and interpret the data; and that
adult's personal fear and denial of death frequently contaminate there-
sults. Adults are reluctant to speak to children about death, they avoid
the topic, they accept surface data unquestioningly because they are
unwilling to probe into a child farther, they systematically misperceive
a child's experience, and they always err in the direction of assuming
that a child has less awareness of death, and less anguish therefrom,
than is the case.
   A widely cited research inquiry into children's fears by Rema La-
pouse and Mary Monk is illustrative of the role of biasY The authors
studied an extensive sample (N=482) of normal children aged six to
twelve, with the objective of determining the nature and the extent of
children's fears-but, because they felt it would have been impossible
to conduct hundreds of interviews of children, they interviewed the
mothers instead! The mothers considered the two fear items most close-
ly related to death ("getting sick, having an accident or dying," or
"worries about health") to be of minimal concern: only 12 percent of
the mothers rated the first item as an important concern, and 16 per-
cent, the second. (By contrast, 44 percent rated "snakes" as an impor-
tant concern, and 38 percent rated "school marks" similarly.)
  ·The authors then selected a subsample (N=192) and interviewed the
children as well as the mothers. The results demonstrated that in gen-
eral mothers underestimated the frequency of children's fears. The two
death-related items showed particularly high discrepancies: on these
items mother and child agreed on their answers in only 45 percent of
the cases: of the disagreements, 90 percent were the result of a mother's un-
derestimating the child's concerns about death. (Mothers also underestimat-
ed, to the same degree, other items more inferentially related to death:
"anyone in the family getting sick or dying," "germs," "fires.") The
findings suggest that mothers tend to be unaware of the degree to
which their children are concerned with death.
80


3 I The Concept of Death in Children
   Another study reports the reactions in a children's hospital to the
death of John F. Kennedy. 12 The researchers note that highly trained
hospital staff members were unexpectedly unreliable in observing chil-
dren's reactions to death. These staff members differed widely not only
in their observations of these reactions but also in their opinions about
how much information children should be given and how much emo-
tional stress children could be expected to tolerate.
   Piaget, who has worked with children his entire professional life,
felt that psychological testing, even of a highly sophisticated genre, of-
ten yields incomplete or deceptive data, and that-and most clinicians
would agree-that the most satisfactory mode of inquiry is a "general
examination" (or a "clinical interview"). Yet there are precious few re-
ports of in-depth interviews with children in the literature. One's nur-
turing instinct is aroused at the sight of the young of almost any mam-
malian species, ranging from kittens, puppies, and colts to humans. It is
difficult to go against biological grain, to expose a child to the naked
truth about death; and this difficulty is, I believe, the major factor be-
hind the dearth of professional inquiry. In fact, I have serious doubts
whether a research project whose design included explicit questioning
of young children about death would today even obtain clearance from
a human subjects research committee; without question, such a project
would encounter strong opposition from parents.
   Consequently, the inquiries are generally inferential and often su-
perficial. There are only a few reports of inquiries based on direct in-
terviews, 13 and the most thorough of these are several decades old. Ma-
ria Nagy and Sylvia Anthony reported on work done in the 1940s.
Nagy (who was known as "Auntie Death" to the children at the school
where she conducted her researches) asked children to draw pictures
about death, to write compositions about death, and to discuss verbally
their thoughts about death. 14 Anthony asked for definitions to death-
linked words and used a story-completion test. 15 Paul Schilder and Da-
vid Wechsler, in 1935, administered a series of death-related pictures to
children and asked for their reactions. 16 Though the pictures were ex-
plicit, indeed macabre, the authors made concessions to the sensitivi-
ties of the children by accepting and reporting the reactions at face val-
ue. Had the subjects been adults, the researchers would never have
condoned this procedure; instead, they would have probed, investigat-
ed, and interpreted the responses at great depth.
   What the Child Is Taught. There is one other obstacle to knowing
what the child knows about death. A child's state of knowing about
death rarely exists long in nascent form: adults are extraordinarily an-
                                                                       81


                                                              I I DEATH
guished at the sight of a child grappling with the idea of death and
rush in to spare the child. The child perceives the adult's anxiety and
accordingly discovers that it is imperative to suppress death concerns:
there will be little genuine relief from his or her parents. Many par-
ents, despite considerable enlightenment and firm resolve to provide
honest instruction, waver in the face of a child's distress. Anthony re-
ports a brief illustrative conversation between a five-year-old child and
his university professor mother:
           Child: "Do animals come to an end, too?"
           Mother: "Yes, animals come to an end, too. Everything that lives
      comes to an end."
           Child: "I don't want to come to an end. I should like to live longer
       than anyone on earth."
           Mother: "You need never die; you can live forever.m 7
Generally parents attempt to assuage a child's fears by offering some
form of denial, either some idiosyncratic denial system or a socially
sanctioned immortality myth. What an investigator often discovers,
then, is not a child's natural inclination but a complex amalgam con-
sisting of a child's awareness, anxiety, and denial intermingled with an
adult's anxiety and denial defenses. What the child should and should
not be told is an issue I shall discuss elsewhere, but we must under-
stand why we choose various courses of death education. Is it for the
child's benefit or the adult's? Erma Furman, who closely studied young
children who had lost a parent, concluded that "concrete information
about death was helpful to them at certain points and that the child's
task was made more difficult when the adults in their environment
wittingly or unwittingly misrepresented or obscured the objective
facts." 18
FIRST AWARENESS OF DEATH
  When does the child first know about death? Several sources of data
are available (all of which are inhibited by the impediments I have de-
scribed): careful longitudinal observations-by parents or trained ob-
servers; psychological tests-primarily word definitions (that is,
"dead," "life," "living"), story completions, TAT (Thematic Appercep-
tion Test), analysis of children's drawings; systematic observations
made by staff of hospital or residential home; and case reports of child
therapists or adult therapists who furnish retrospective data.
   Death and the Development of Language. The more objective measures
rely on the child's mastery of language. Anthony attempted to answer
82


 3 I The Concept of Death in Children
the question, When does the child know about death? by asking
eighty-three children to define the word "dead" inserted into a test of
general vocabulary. The responses of 100 percent of the children seven
or older (and of two thirds of the six-year-olds) indicated comprehen-
sion of the meaning of the word (though they often included in their
definitions phenomena not logically or biologically essential). Only
three of the twenty-two children six or younger were totally ignorant
of the meaning of the word. 19
   Another objective approach to the problem is to study the child's de-
velopment of the concept of "living" or of "life." Young children seem
to have much confusion about the properties of living entities. J. Sully
noted in 1895 that young children consider all apparently spontaneous
movements as a sign of life and, accordingly, consider such objects as
fire or smoke to be alive. 20 Piaget considered that the animism of chil-
dren (which, he felt, paralleled the animism of primitive man) falls
into four stages. At first inanimate objects are generally considered to
have life and will. At about the beginning of the seventh year the child
attributes life only to things that move. From the eighth to twelfth year
the child attributes life to things that move by themselves; and after-
ward the child's view increasingly becomes the adult view.• 21
   The child goes through a great deal of confusion in trying to under-
stand what lives or has life and what is inanimate. For example, in one
study over one third of seven- to eight-year-old children believed that
a watch or a river lives; three fourths felt that the moon lives, whereas
12 percent felt that a tree does not live. 22 The confusion of the child is
probably enhanced by confusing messages from the environment. The
child is never educated clearly and precisely about these matters by
adults. He or she is confused by dolls and mechanical toys which simu-
late life. Poetic license in language is another source of confusion
("clouds race across the sky," "the moon peeps in at the window," "the
brook dances to the sea").
   Observations of Children. These studies of linguistic development
have prompted many developmentalists and clinicians to date the
child's awareness of death to a time much later than is indicated by the
   •Piaget considered the subject of death to be instrumental in the development of ma-
ture concepts of causality. In the early thought of the child, motivation is considered the
source and explanation of the existence of things and every cause is coupled with a mo-
tive. When the child becomes aware of death, that system of thought undergoes an up-
heaval: animals and people die, and their deaths cannot be explained as a result of their
motives. Gradually children begin to understand that death must be a law of nature-a
law that is uniform and impersonal.
                                                                                         83


                                                            I I DEATH
direct observations that I shall now consider. Perhaps researchers are
making unnecessarily stringent evidential demands. Is there any rea-
son that a child must be able to define "living," or, for that matter,
"dead" in order to know in his bones that he, like insects, animals, or
other people, will one day cease to be. Researchers who study very
young children almost invariably conclude that they have considerable
traffic with death. The theoretical objection that the child younger
than eight to ten cannot comprehend abstract concepts begs the ques-
tion. As Kastenbaum and Aisenberg point out, "between the extremes
of 'no understanding' and explicit, integrated abstract thought there
are many ways by which the young mind can enter into a relationship
with death." 23 Despite a certain vagueness, the phrase "enter into are-
lationship with death" is serviceable: the very young child thinks
about death, is fearful of it, is curious about it, registers death-related
perceptions that stay with him or her all his life, and erects magic-
based defenses against death.
   Kastenbaum and Aisenberg describe some observations of David, an
eighteen-month-old child, who discovered a dead bird in his yard. The
boy appeared stunned, and his face, according to his parents, "was set
in a frozen, ritualized expression resembling nothing so much as the
stylized Greek dramatic mask for tragedy." 24 David was a typical tod-
dler who tended to pick up and examine everything he could reach; in
this instance, however, he crouched closely to the bird but made no ef-
fort to touch it. A few weeks later he found another dead bird. This
time he picked up the bird and insisted, through gestures, which in-
cluded an imitation of a bird flying, that the bird be placed back on a
tree limb. When his parents placed the dead bird in the tree, and the
bird, alas! did not fly, David repeatedly insisted that the bird be placed
in the tree. A few weeks later the boy's attention focused on a single
fallen leaf, and he became deeply engaged in trying to place it back on
the tree. When he failed to reverse the leaf's fate, he instructed his fa-
ther to restore the leaf to the tree. Because David was not able to speak,
one cannot be certain of the precise nature of his inner experience, but
his behavior suggests that he was grappling with the concept of death.
Certainly there is no question that the exposure to death elicited un-
precedented and unusual behavior.
   Szandor Brant, a psychologist, reports an incident involving his son
Michael, aged two years three months. 26 Michael, who had been
weaned from his bottle for a year, began waking up several times a
night screaming hysterically for a bottle. When questioned, Michael in-
sisted he must have a bottle or "I won't make contact," "I'll run out of
84


3 I The Concept of Death in Children
gas," "My motor won't run and I'll die." His father says that, on two
occasions immediately prior to Michael's night awakenings, a car had
run out of gas and in the child's presence there had been much discus-
sion of how the motor had "died" and how a battery had gone "dead."
Michael seemed convinced, his father concludes, that he had to keep
on drinking fluid or else he, too, would die. Michael's visible death
concerns had begun even earlier in life when he saw a photograph of a
dead relative and directed an endless stream of questions toward his
parents about the status of this relative. Michael's story indicates that
death can be a source of significant distress for the very young child.
Furthermore, as was true with the previous case, Michael at a very ear-
ly age recognized death as a problem-perhaps, as Kastenbaum sug-
gests, the first vital problem and a prime stimulus to continued mental
development. 26
   Gregory Rochlin, on the basis of several play sessions with a series of
normal children aged three to five, concludes, too, that the child at an
early age learns that life has an end, and that death will come for him-
self or herself as well as for those upon whom he or she depends.
       My own studies have shown that the knowledge of death, including the
       possibility of one's own death, is acquired at a very early age, and far
       sooner than is generally supposed. By the age of three years the fear of
       one's own death is communicable in unequivocal terms. How much ear-
       lier than three years of age this information is acquired is a matter of
       tenuous speculation. Communication with a younger child on the sub-
       ject is unlikely. It also would be much too fragmentary. What is more im-
       portant is that in a child three years old death as a fear, as a possibility,
       has already begun to produce significant effects. 27
   The evidence is readily available, Rochlin states, to whoever is will-
ing to listen to children and observe their play. 28 Children the world
over play games of death and resurrection. Opportunities to learn
about death are abundant: a trip to the meat market tells any child
more than he or she wishes to know. Possibly no experience is re-
quired; possibly, as Max Scheler claims/9 each of us has intuitive
knowledge of death. Regardless of the source of the knowledge, how-
ever, one thing is certain: the tendency is deep-seated in each of us,
even in early life, to deny death. Knowledge is relinquished when de-
sire opposes it.
   When reality intrudes forcibly, the fledgling death-denial defenses
falter, allowing anxiety to break through. Rochlin describes a three-
and-one-half-year-old boy who for several months had been asking his
parents when he or they would die. 30 He was heard to mutter that he
                                                                                 85


                                                               I I DEATH
himself would not die. Then his grandfather died. (This grandfather
lived in a distant city and was barely known to the child.) The child be-
gan having frequent nightmares and regularly delayed going to sleep;
he apparently equated going to sleep and death. He asked whether it
hurt to die, and commented that he was afraid to die. His play indicat-
ed a preoccupation with illness, death, killing, and being killed.
Though it is difficult to know with assurance what "death" means to
the inner world of the preoperational child, it seemed that this child
associated it with considerable anxiety: death meant being put in the
sewer, being hurt, disappearing, vanishing down the drain, rotting in
the graveyard.
   Another child, aged four, also lost a grandfather who died on his
third birthday. The boy insisted that his grandfather was not dead.
Then when he was told that his grandfather had died of old age, he
wanted reassurance that his mother and father were not old, and told
them that he would not get older. Part of the transcription of this play
session reveals clearly that this four-year-old had "entered into a rela-
tionship with death."
        D: Last night I found a dead bee.
        Dr.: Did it look dead?
        D: He got killed. Someone stepped on him and it got dead.
        Dr.: Dead like people are dead?
        D: They're dead but they're not like dead people. Nothing like dead
      people.
        Dr.: Is there a difference?
        D: People are dead and bees are dead. But they're put in the ground
      and they're no good. People.
        Dr.: Are no good?
        D: After a long time he'll get alive (the bee). But not a person. I don't
      want to talk about it.
        Dr.: Why?
        D: Because I have two grandfathers alive.
        Dr.: Two?
        D: One.
        Dr.: What happened to one?
        D: He died a long time ago. A hundred years ago.
        Dr.: Will you live long too?
        D: A hundred years.
        Dr.: Then what?
        D: I'll die perhaps.
        Dr.: All people die.
        D: Yes, I will have to.
        Dr.: That is sad.
        D: I have to anyway.
86


3 I The Concept of Death in Children
          Dr.: You have to?
          D: Sure. My father is going to die. That is sad.
          Dr.: Why is he?
          D: Never mind.
          Dr.: You don't want to talk about it.
          D: I want to see my mother now.
          Dr.: I'll take you to her.
          D: I know where dead people are. In cemeteries. My old grandfather
       is dead. He can't get out.
          Dr.: You mean where he is buried.
          D: He can't get out. Never. 31
   Melanie Klein, on the basis of her experience in analyzing children,
concludes that the very young child has an intimate relationship with
death-a relationship that antedates by a considerable period his or her
conceptual knowledge of death. The fear of death, Klein states, is part
of the infant's earliest life experience. She accepts Freud's 1923 theory
that there is a universal unconscious drive toward death, but argues
that, if the human being is to survive, then there must be a counterbal-
ancing fear of loss of life. Klein considers the fear of death as the origi-
nal source of anxiety; sexual and superego anxiety are thus latecomers
and derivative phenomena.
       My analytic observations show that there is in the unconscious a fear of
       annihilation of life. I would also think that if we assume the existence of
       a death instinct, we must also assume that in the deepest layers of the
       mind there is a response to this instinct in the form of fear of annihila-
       tion of life. The danger arising from the inner working of the death in-
       stinct is the first cause of anxiety .... The fear of being devoured is an
       undisguised expression of the fear of total annihilation of the self....
       The fear of death enters into castration fear and is not "analogous" to it.
       ... Since reproduction is the essential way of counteracting death, the
       loss of the genital would mean the end of the creative power which pre-
       serves and continues life. 32
   Klein's argument that concern about reproduction flows from death
fear is, I believe, formidable and brings into question traditional ana-
lytic views of what is "primary" in the mental life of the individual.
Kurt Eissler, who early in the psychoanalytic movement thought deep-
ly about death, arrived also at the conclusion that the child's early pre-
occupation with sexuality is a derivative inquiry, secondary to an earli-
er and terrifying awareness of death:
       Refined research into this matter might show that the child's inquiry
       into the generative processes (i.e. the "facts of life") is a secondary edi-
                                                                                87


                                                                1/DEATH
      tion of an earlier and short-lasting inquiry into death. Possibly the child
      turns away from such a inquiry because of the accompanying horror and
      because of the utter hopelessness and ensuing despair about any possi-
      ble progress in his investigation. 33
  Other workers, who have observed children closely, have arrived at
the conclusion that the young child, regardless of whether theoretical-
ly he or she is intellectually equipped to understand death, grasps the
essence of the matter. Anna Freud, working with young children in the
London blitz, wrote: "It can be safely said that all the children who
were over two years at the time of the Lo~don blitz realized the house
will fall down when bombed and that people are often killed or get
hurt in falling houses." 34 She described a four-and-one-half-year-old
child who acknowledged his father's death: The child's mother wished
the children to deny their father's death, but the child insisted, "I
know all about my father. He has been killed and he will never come
back."
  Furman worked with a large number of children who had lost a par-
ent, and she concluded that during their second year of life children
could achieve a basic understanding of death. The understanding of
death is enhanced by some type of earlier experience that helps the
child form the necessary mental category. Furman cites the following
example:
      Suzie was barely three years old when her mother died. After being told
      this sad news, Suzie soon asked, "Where is Mommy?" Her father re-
      minded her of the dead bird they had found and buried not too long
      ago. He explained that Mommy, too, had died and had to be buried. He
      would show her where whenever Suzie wished. One month later Suzie
      reported to her father, "Jimmy (the neighbor's six-year-old son) told me
      that my Mommy would come back soon because his mommy said so. I
      told him that's not true because my mommy is dead and when you're
      dead you can't ever come back. That's right, daddy, isn't it?" 35
A mother reported this interaction with a child of three years and nine
months:
      Jane has received no religious instruction and has so far never met death
      in connection with any human being of her acquaintance. A few days
      ago she began asking questions about death .... The conversation began
      by Jane asking if people came back again in the spring like flowers. (A
      week or so before she had been very upset by her favorite flower dying
      and we had consoled her by saying they would return in the spring.) I
      answered that they do not return the same but different, possibly as ba-
      bies. This answer obviously worried her-she hates change and people
88


3 I The Concept of Death in Children
       getting old-for she said, "I don't want Nan to be different, I don't want
       her to change and grow old." Then "Will Nan die? Shall I die too? Does
       everyone die?" On my saying yes, she broke into really heartbreaking
       tears and kept on saying, "But I don't want to die, I don't want to
       die...." She then asked how people died, if it hurt, whether when they
       were dead they opened their eyes again, whether they spoke, ate and
       wore clothes. Suddenly in the midst of all these questions and tears she
       said, "Now I will go on with my tea" and the matter was temporarily
       forgotten. 36
   It is interesting to note the troubled uncertain responses of this
mother, who a short time previously had managed with little difficulty
to answer her daughter's questions about birth and where babies come
from. She ended the preceding report: "It took me all unawares. Al-
though I expected the questions about birth, etc., those about death I
hadn't thought of yet and my own ideas are very hazy." Obviously a
child perceives such a parent's anxiety and confusion along with any
verbal comforting reassurances the parent may provide.
   Other reports of conversations with parents give the flavor of the
child's fear and curiosity about death. For example:
       Lately at bath time Richard (5 yrs. 1 mo.) has begun to whimper and be
       miserable about dying. Yesterday as he swam up and down in his bath
       he played with the possibility of never dying, of living to a thousand.
       Today he said, "I might be alone when I die, will you be with me?" "But
       I don't want to be dead ever; I don't want to die." Some days previously
       when he had seemed afraid of not knowing how to die, his mother had
       told him he need not worry because she would die first so he would
       know how it was done. This seemed to reassure him. 37
   In a controversial essay Adah Maurer makes some intriguing specu-
lations about the infant's early awareness of death. 38 The infant's first
task, Maurer reasons, is to differentiate between self and environ-
ment-to know being as the opposite of nonbeing. As the baby wavers
back and forth between consciousness and unconsciousness, between
sleep and wakefulness, he or she comes to have a sense of these two
states. What is the infant's mental experience during a night terror?
Maurer suggests that the infant may be experiencing fear and aware-
ness of nonbeing. Lying in a dark, quiet room and deprived of both
sight and hearing, the infant may be panicked by a half-here, disem-
bodied sensation. (Max Stern, who studied night terrors, arrived at a
similar conclusion: the child is terrified of nothingness. 39 )
  Why does the infant delight in the game of throwing toys from a
highchair? The infant who can find an accommodating partner to re-
                                                                             89


                                                          I I DEATH
turn the toy, will generally persist in the game until the partner retires
in fatigue. Perhaps this delight stems from erotic pleasure in muscular
movement; perhaps it is a manifestation of what Robert White calls the
drive for "effectance" -the inherent pleasure in mastering one's
environment!0 Maurer suggests that the infant is fascinated by disap-
pearance and reappearance which, in the thought and behavior avail-
able to the infant, are material symbols of the concepts of being and
nonbeing!1 Indeed, White's effectance drive may be a derivative of the
infant's attempt to vanquish nonbeing. These speculations resonate
with an enormous body of child developmental literature on "object
permanence," a thorough discussion of which would take me too far
afield. Briefly, though, the child cannot appreciate the disappearance
of an object until he or she established its permanence. Permanence has
no meaning without an appreciation of change, destruction, or disap-
pearance; thus, the child develops the concept of permanence and
change in tandem. 42 Furthermore, there is an intimate relationship
between object permanence and a sense of self-permanence; the same
type of oscillation, the pairing of permanence (aliveness, being) and
disappearance (nonbeing, death) is essential in the development of the
child.
   "All gone" is one of the first phrases in the child's vocabulary, and
"all gone" is a common theme in childhood fears. Children note how a
chicken disappears at mealtime; or, once the plug is pulled, how the
bath water becomes all gone; or how the feces is flushed away. Rare is
the child who does not fear being devoured, flushed away, or sucked
through the drain. Analytic literature notes the unconscious equation
of feces and corpse. 43 Perhaps it is time for psychotherapists to recon-
sider the dynamics of the toilet training conflict, because more than
anal eroticism or stubborn resistance may be involved: to the child, toi-
let training raises fears about physical integrity and survival.
   When the child realizes that eternal recurrence of vanished objects is
not the order of the day, then the child searches for other strategies to
protect himself or herself from the threat of nonbeing. The child be-
comes the master rather than the victim of "all gone." The child pulls
out the bathtub plug, flushes objects down the toilet, gleefully blows
out matches, is delighted to assist mother by pressing the pedal of the
 garbage pail. Later the child disperses death, either symbolically in
 games of cowboys and Indians, or literally by extinguishing life in in-
 sects. Indeed, Karen Horney felt that the hostility and the destructive-
 ness of a child are directly proportional to the extent to which that
 child feels his or her survival is endangered.
90


3 I The Concept of Death in Children
ONCE THE CHILD "KNOWS," WHAT HAPPENS TO THE KNOWING?
   The known does not remain known. Matilda Mcintire, Carol Angle,
and Lorraine Struempler inquired of 598 children whether a dead pet
knows that its owner misses it, and they found that seven-year-olds are
far more inclined than are children of eleven and twelve to accept
death's finality and irreversibility. 44 A related finding was reported by
Irving Alexander and Arthur Adlerstein who tested the GSR* of a large
number of children, ages five to sixteen, who were exposed to a series
of death-related words interspersed among a series of neutral words!5
They divided the children into three groups: childhood (5-8), pre-
adolescence or latency (9-12), and adolescence (13-16). The results in-
dicated that the young children (and the adolescents) had a much greater
emotional response to death-related words than had the latency-aged subjects.
The authors concluded that latency is a benign period, the "golden
age" of childhood. "Children at this age seem to be too much involved
in the routine of life and its attendant pleasures to be concerned with
the concept of death."
   I believe that there is a less pollyannaish way of explaining these re-
sults, that the child at an early age stumbles upon the "true facts of
life," that the child's solitary researches lead him or her to the discov-
ery of death. But the child is overwhelmed by the discovery and expe-
riences primal anxiety. Though the child searches for reassurance, he
or she must deal with death: he or she may panic in the face of it, deny
it, personify it, scoff at it, repress it, displace it, but deal with it the
child must. During latency the child learns (or is taught) to negate real-
ity; and gradually, as the child develops efficient and sophisticated
forms of denial, awareness of death glides into the unconscious, and
the explicit fear of death abates. The carefree days of preadolescence-
the "golden age" of latency-do not diminish death anxiety but result
from it. Though in latency one acquires much general knowledge, at
the same time one retreats from knowledge about the facts of life. And
it is the awareness of death, as much as infantile sexuality, that is "la-
tent." During adolescence, childhood denial systems are no longer ef-
fective. The introspective tendencies and the greater resources of the
adolescent permit him or her to face, once again, the inevitability of
death, to bear the anxiety, and to search for an alternate mode of cop-
ing with the facts of life.
•Galvanic skin response-a physiological measure of anxiety.
                                                                          91


                                                                  I I DEATH
STAGES OF KNOWING
   A working model of the child's subsequent development of the con-
cept of death depends upon the open question of when he or she first
"knows" about death. Either the child gradually develops an awareness
and understanding of death; or, as I believe, the child is caught in a
"herky-jerky" process of "knowing" too much, too early, and then
finds ways to repress that knowledge, to "un-know," until, gradually,
the child is prepared to accept that which he or she originally knew.
There is no certainty in this matter; there exists no conclusive evidence
for either viewpoint.
   I consider the stages that succeed a child's first knowledge of death
as based on denial. Inherent in the concept of denial is the existence of
former knowledge: one can only deny that which is known. If a reader
chooses not to accept the arguments I have posited in support of former
knowledge, then he or she must read "approximations to knowledge"
where I have written "denial."
   Denial: Death Is Temporary, Diminution, Suspended Animation, or Sleep.
Many children old enough to talk report that they consider death to be
reversible or temporary or to be a diminution rather than a cessation of
consciousness. This view receives considerable reinforcement from the
ubiquitous television cartoons that show characters blown apart, flat-
tened, crushed, or mutilated in an endless number of ways and then, fi-
nally and miraculously, reconstituted. Nagy reported some illustrative
interview excerpts:
  S.C. (4 yrs., 8 mos.): "It can't move because it's in the coffin."
        "If it weren't in the coffin, could it move?"
        "It can eat and drink."
   S.J. (5 yrs., 10 mos.): "Its eyes were closed, it lay there, so dead. No matter
        what one does to it, it doesn't say a word."
        "After ten years, will it be the same as when it was buried?"
        "It will be older then, it will always be older and older. When it is 100
        years old it will be exactly like a piece of wood."
        "How will it be like a piece of wood?"
        "That I couldn't say. My little sister will be five years old now. I wasn't
        alive yet when she died. She will be so big this time. She has a small cof-
        fin, but she fits in the small coffin."
        "What is she doing now, do you think?"
        "Lying down, always just lies there. She's still so small, she can't be like
        a piece of wood. Only very old people."
92


3 I The Concept of Death in Children
       "What happens there under the earth?"
  B.l. (4 yrs., 11 mos.): "He cries because he is dead."
       "But why should he cry?"
       "Because he is afraid for himself."
 T.P. (4 yrs., 10 mos.): "A dead person is just as if he were asleep. Sleeps in the
       ground, too."
       "Sleeps the same as you do at night or otherwise?"
       "Well-closes his eyes. Sleeps like people at night. Sleeps like that, just
       like that."
       "How do you know whether someone is asleep or is dead?"
       "I know if they go to bed at night and don't open their eyes. If some-
       body goes to bed and doesn't get up, he's dead or ill."
       "Will he ever wake up?"
       "Never. A dead person only knows if somebody goes out to the grave or
       something. He feels that somebody is there, or is talking."
       "He feels the flowers put on his grave. The water touches the sand.
       Slowly, slowly, he hears everything. Auntie, does the dead person feel it
       if it goes deep into the ground?" (i.e., the water).
       "What do you think, wouldn't he like to come away from there?"
       "He would like to come out, but the coffin is nailed down."
       "If he weren't in the coffin, could he come back?"
       "He couldn't root up all that sand."
H.G. (8 yrs., 5 mos.): "People think dead persons can feel."
       "And can't they?"
       "No, they can't feel, like sleep. Now, I sleep, I don't feel it, except when
       I dream."
       "Do we dream when we're dead?"
       "I think we don't. We never dream when we're dead. Sometimes some-
       thing flashes out, but not half as long as a dream."
 L.B. (5 yrs., 6 mos.): "His eyes were closed."
       "Why?"
       "Because he was dead."
       "What is the difference between sleeping and dying?"
       "Then they bring the coffin and put him in it. They put the hands like
       this when a person is dead."
                                                                                 93


                                                                    1/DEATH
     "What happens to him in the coffin?"
     "The worms eat him. They bore into the coffin."
     "Why does he let them eat him?"
      "He can't get up any longer, because there is sand on him. He can't get
      out of the coffin."
     "If there weren't sand on him, could he get out?"
     "Certainly, if he wasn't very badly stabbed. He would get his hand out
      of the sand and dig. That shows that he still wants to live."
T.D. (6 yrs., 9 mos): "My sister's godfather died and I took hold of his hand.
      His hand was so cold. It was green and blue. His face was all wrinkled
      together. He can't move. He can't clench his hands, because he is dead.
      And he can't breathe."
      "His face?"
      "It has goose-flesh, because he is cold. He is cold because he is dead and
      cold everywhere."
      "Does he feel the cold or was it just that his skin was like that?"
      "If he is dead he feels too. If he is dead he feels a tiny little bit. When he
      is quite dead he no longer feels anything."
G.P. (6 yrs.): "He stretched out his arms and lay down. You couldn't push
      down his arms. He can't speak. He can't move. Can't see. Can't open his
      eyes. He lies for four days."
      "Why for four days?"
      "Because the angels don't know yet where he is. The angels dig him out,
      take him with them. They give him wings and fly away." 46
   These statements are most informative. One is struck by the internal
contradictions, by the shifting levels of knowing that are apparent
even in these short excerpts. The dead feeL but they do not feel. The
dead grow but somehow stay the same age and fit in the same-size cof-
fin. A child buries a pet dog but leaves food on the grave because the
dog may be a little hungry. 47 The child seems to believe in several
stages of death. The dead can feel"a tiny little bit" (or may have dream
flashes); but one who is "quite dead ... no longer feels anything." (In-
cidentally, these quotations are offered by Nagy as proof that a child ei-
ther considers death as temporary or denies it completely by equating
it with departure or sleep. Once again, observer bias seems evident; to
me, these passages indicate that the children had considerable knowl-
edge. There is nothing temporary or incomplete about being eaten by
94


3 I The Concept of Death in Children
worms, by remaining forever under the dirt, about being "quite dead"
and "no longer feel[ing] anything.")
   The child's equation of sleep and death is well known. The state of
sleep is the child's closest experience of being nonconscious and the
only clue the child has to what it is like to be dead. (In Greek mythol-
ogy, death, Thanatos, and sleep, Hypnos, were twin brothers.) This as-
sociation has implications for sleep disorders, and many clinicians have
suggested that death fear is an important factor in insomnia both for
adults and children. Many fearful children regard sleep as perilous. Re-
call the childhood prayer:
         Now I lay me down to sleep,
         I pray the Lord my soul to keep;
         If I should die before I wake,
         I pray the Lord my soul to take.
    The statements Nagy collected also make it crystal clear that chil-
dren, even with imperfect knowledge, consider death dreadful and
frightening. Horrifyng indeed are the ideas of being trapped in a
nailed-down coffin, crying for oneself under the earth, lying buried for
a hundred years and then turning into wood, being eaten by worms,
feeling the cold, turning blue and green, or being unable to breathe.•
   These children's views of death are sobering, especially for parents
and educators who prefer to ignore the unpleasantness of the entire
subject. "What they don't know won't hurt them" is the rationale be-
hind officially sanctioned silence. Yet what children do not know, they
invent; and, as we see in these examples, the inventions are more hid-
eous than the truth. I shall have more to say about death education lat-
er, but for now it is evident that the beliefs of children about death are
terrifying indeed, and that children feel compelled to find ways to set
their minds at ease.
    Denial: The Two Basic Bulwarks Against Death. The child has two basic
defenses against the terror of death-defenses that date from the very
beginning of life: deep belief both in his or her personal inviolability
and in the existence of a uniquely personaL ultimate rescuer. Though
   • These early views of death remain in the unconscious with astonishing perdurance.
Elliot Jacques, for example, describes this dream of a middle-aged claustrophobic patient:
''She was lying in a coffin. She had been sliced into small chunks and was dead. But
there was a spider-web-thin thread of nerve running through every chunk and connect-
ed with her brain. As a result she could experience everything. She knew she was dead.
She could not move or make a sound. She could only lie in the claustrophobic dark and
silence of the coffin.""
                                                                                       95


                                                                        !/DEATH
these beliefs are abetted by explicit parental and religious instruction
in afterlife myths, in an all-protecting God, and in the efficacy of per-
sonal prayer, they are also grounded in the infant's early life
experience.
   Specialness. Each of us, first as child and then as adult, clings to an
irrational belief in our specialness. Limits, aging, death may apply to '
them but not to oneself, not to me. At a deep level one is convinced of
one's personal invulnerability and imperishability. The origins of this
primeval belief (or "ur-defense," as Jules Masserman terms it49 ) are to
be found in the dawn of life. For each of us, early life is a time of in-
tense egocentricity. One is the universe: there are no boundaries be-
tween one and other objects and beings. One's every whim is satisfied
without personal effort: one's thought results in the deed. One is tern-
plated with a sense of specialness, and one summons this ready belief
as a shield against death anxiety.
   The Ultimate Rescuer. Hand in hand with this anthropocentric delu-
sion (and I do not use the word in a pejorative sense, for it is a widely
shared, perhaps universal, delusion) is a belief in the ultimate rescuer.
This belief, too, is grounded in the dawn of life, in the time of the
shadowy figures, the parents, those wondrous appendages of the
child's, who are not only powerful movers but eternal servants as well.
The belief in the external servant is reinforced by the parent's caring
watchfulness during infancy and childhood. Time and time again the
child ventures too far, encounters the cruel picket fence of reality, and
is rescued by enormous maternal wings which enfold him or her in
body warmth.
   The beliefs in specialness and the ultimate rescuer serve the develop-
ing child well: they are the absolute foundation of the defense struc-
ture that the individual erects against death terror. Upon them are
erected other secondary defenses which in the adult patient often ob-
scure the original ur-defenses as well as the nature of the primal anxi-
ety. These two basic defenses are deeply ingrained (witness their per-
sistence, in terms of immortality myths and the belief in a personal
god, in virtually every major religious system•) and persist into adult-
hood to exert a powerful influence, as I shall discuss in the next chap-
ter, upon character structure and symptom formation.
   • It is important to underscore that the psychodynamic value or meaning of religion
does not necessarily obviate the intrinsic truth of religious views. Or, as Viktor Frankl
puts it: "to satisfy precocious sexual curiosity we invent the story that storks deliver ba-
bies. But it does not follow from this that storks do not exist!" 50
96


3 I The Concept of Death in Children
   Denial: The Belief That Children Do Not Die. One common solace that
children avail themselves of early in life is a belief that children have
an immunity from death. The young do not die; death occurs to the
old, and old age is so very, very far away. Some illustrations:
          S. (aged 5 yrs., 2 mos.): Where's your mummy?
          Mother: In heaven. She died some time ago. I think she was about
       70.
          S.: She must have been 80 or 90.
          Mother: No, only 70.
          S.: Well, men live till they're 99. When are you going to die?
          Mother: Oh, I don't know. When I'm about 70 or 80 or 90.
          S.: Oh (pause) when I'm grown up I shan't shave and then I will
       have a beard, shan't I? [In a previous conversationS. said that he knew
       that men grew beards when they became very, very old. Later it became
       clear that he proposed to abstain from shaving in an effort to delay death
       indefinitely!] 51
          Ruth (4 yrs., 7 mos.): Will you die, Father?
          Father: Yes, but not before I grow old.
          Ruth: Will you grow old?
          Father: Yes, yes.
          Ruth: Shall I grow old, too?
          Father: Yes.
          Ruth: Everyday I'm afraid of dying. I wish I might never grow old
       for then I would never die. Would 1? 52
          Interviewer: Can a child die?
          G. M. (age 6): No, boys don't die unless they get run over. If they go
       to a hospital I think they come out living.
          E. G. (age 5): I shall not die. When you are old you die. I shall never
       die. When people get old they die. [Later he says he will die when he
       gets very old.f"
   In response to story-completion tests, most children gave a prefer-
ence for staying a child a long time rather than growing up quickly. A
nine-and-one-half-year-old boy stated that he wanted to stop growing
in order to remain a child because "as someone grows older, there's less
life in him." 54
   The actua1 death of a child, of course, poses severe problems for chil-
dren, which they often resolve by making a distinction between dying
and being killed. One boy stated, "Boys don't die unless they get
stabbed or hit by a car." Another child said, "When you're ten years old
I don't know how you could die unless someone kills you." 55 Another
(age six): "I won't die but when you go out into the rain, you can die." 56
All of these comments assuage anxiety by reassuring the child that
                                                                              97


                                                                  !/DEATH
death is not an immediate, or at least not an unavoidable, problem. Ei-
ther death is relegated to old age-a time beyond imagination for the
child-or else accidental death may occur, but only if one is "very,
very" careless.
   Denial: Personification of Death. Most children between the ages of
five and nine go through a period in which they anthropomorphize
death. Death is given form and will: it is the bogeyman, the grim
reaper, a skeleton, a ghost, a shadow; or it is simply associated with the
dead. Illustrations abound:
  B.G. (4 yrs., 9 mos.): "Death does wrong."
       "How does it do wrong?"
       "Stabs you to dt>ath with a knife."
       "What is death?"
       "A man."
       "What sort of a man?"
       "Death-man."
       "How do you know?"
       "I saw him."
       "Where?"
       "In the grass. I was gathering flowers."
 B.M. (6 yrs., 7 mos.): "Death carries off bad children. Catches them and takes
       them away."
       "What is he like?"
       "White as snow. Death is white everywhere. It's wicked. It doesn't like
       children."
       "Why?"
       "Because it's bad-hearted. Death even takes away men and women
        too."
       "Why?"
       "Because it doesn't like to see them."
       "What is white about it?"
       "The skeleton. The bone-skeleton."
       "But in reality is it like that, or do they only say so?"
       "It really is, too. Once I talked about it and at night the real death came.
        It has a key to everywhere, so it can open the doors. It came in, messed
       about everywhere. It came over to the bed and began to pull away the
98


 3 I The Concept of Death in Children
        covers. I covered myself up well. It couldn't take them off. Afterwards it
        went away."
  P.G. (8 yrs., 6 mos.): "Death comes when somebody dies, and comes with a
        scythe, cuts him down and takes him away. When death goes away, it
        leaves footprints behind. When the footprints disappeared, it came back
        and cut down more people. And then they wanted to catch it, and it
        disappeared."
  B.T. (9 yrs., 11 mos.): "Death is a skeleton. It is so strong it could overturn a
        ship. Death can't be seen. Death is in a hidden place. It hides in an
        island."
  V.P. (9 yrs., 11 mos.): "Death is very dangerous. You never know what min-
        ute he is going to carry you off with him. Death is invisible, something
        nobody has ever seen in all the world. But at night he comes to every-
        body and carries them off with him. Death is like a skeleton. All the
        parts are made of bone. But then when it begins to be light, when it's
        morning, there's not a trace of him. It's that dangerous, death."
  M.I. (9 yrs., 9 mos.): "They always draw death with a skeleton and a black
        cloak. In reality you can't see him. In reality he's only a sort of spirit.
        Comes and takes people away, he doesn't care whether it's a beggar or a
        king. If he wants to, he makes them die." 67
   Though these accounts seem frightening, the process of death per-
sonification is an anxiety emollient. The vision of a stalking skeleton
emerging nightly from graveyard humus, grim though it be, is, in con-
trast to the truth, reassuring. As long as a child believes that death is
brought by some outside force or figure, the child is safe from the real-
ly terrible truth that death is not external-that, from the beginning of
life, one carries within the spores of one's own death. Furthermore, if
death is a sentient being, if-as the child said in the last illustration-
the situation is such that "if he wants to, he makes them die," then per-
haps Death can be influenced not to want to. Perhaps like the Button
Maker, Ibsen's death metaphor in Peer Gynt, Death can be delayed, pro-
pitiated or-who knows?-even outwitted or defeated. In personifying
death, the child recapitulates cultural evolution: every primitive cul-
ture anthropomorphizes the blind forces of nature in an effort to expe-
rience greater control over its own destiny. •
   •Koocher's 1974 study of death attitudes of American children'" does not corroborate
Nagy's findings (with Hungarian children) about the personification of death. Perhaps
there are marked cultural differences, but the difference in methodology of the two stud-
ies makes comparisons difficult: in the American study the interview was heavily struc-
tured with little probing or subject-interviewer interaction, whereas in the Hungarian
project the interview was far more open-ended, intensive, and personal.
                                                                                       99


                                                                    I I DEATH
  The anthropomorphic fear of death lingers with one all through life.
Rare is the individual who does not at some level of awareness contin~
ue to harbor a fear of darkness, demons, ghosts, or some representation
of the supernatural. Even a moderately well~made supernatural or
ghost movie will, as filmmakers well know, strike deep chords in an
audience.
  Denial: Taunting of Death. The older child attempts to assuage fear of
death by confirming his or her aliveness. Nine~ and ten~year~olds often
taunt death; they jeer at their old enemy. A study of the language of
schoolchildren revealed many death jibes that seemed hilariously fun~
ny to them; for example,
       You gonna be burned or buried.
       It's not the cough that carries you off, it's the coffin they carry you off in.
       Now I lay me down to sleep,
       A bag of bananas at my feet.
       If I should die before I wake,
       You'll know it was the tummy ache.
       The worms crawl in,
       The worms crawl out,
       You hardly know what it's all about."9
  Many children, especially boys, engage in feats of reckless darede~
viltry. (Quite possibly some male adolescent delinquent behavior may
reflect a persistence of this defense against death anxiety.) Young girls
do so much less commonly, either because of social role demands or be~
cause, as Maurer suggests,60 they are less oppressed by death fears
owing to their knowledge of their biological role as mothers, and
hence creators.
   Denial of Death Awareness in Child Psychiatric Literature. In spite of the
compelling and persuasive arguments and supporting evidence that
children discover death at an early age and are pervasively concerned
with it, one searches in vain for a reasoned inclusion of death fear in
psychodynamic formulations of personality development or in psycho~
pathology. Why is there a discrepancy between clinical observation
and dynamic theory? There are, I believe, a "how" and a "why" to
consider.
   How? I believe that death is excluded from psychodynamic theory by
a simple mechanism: death is translated into "separation," which as~
sumes death's role in dynamic theory. John Bowlby, in his monumen~
tal work on separation,61 presents convincing ethologicaL experimen~
100


 3 I The Concept of Death in Children
tal, and observational evidence, too extensive to be considered here,
that indicates that separation from the mother is a catastrophic event
for the infant, and that separation anxiety is clearly evident during the
ages of six to thirty months. Bowlby concludes-and this conclusion is
widely accepted by clinicians-that separation is the primal experience
in the formation of anxiety: separation anxiety is the fundamental anxi-
ety; and other sources of anxiety, including the fear of death, acquire
emotional significance by equation with separation anxiety. In other
words, death is fearful because it re-evokes separation anxiety.
   Bowlby's work, for the most part, is elegantly argued. Yet in his con-
sideration of death anxiety his imagination seems curiously curtailed.
For example, he cites Jersild's research in which four hundred children
were asked about their fears. 62 Jersild found that specific fears of be-
coming ill or dying were conspicuous for their infrequency: they were
mentioned by none of the two hundred children under nine years of
age and by only six of the two hundred from nine to twelve. Bowlby
concludes from these data that fear of death in children under ten is
absent, that it is a later and learned fear, and that it is important be-
cause it is equated with separation.63 }ersild's research shows that what
children do fear are animals, darkness, heights, or being attacked in the
dark by such creatures as ghosts or kidnapers. What is not asked is the
obvious question, What is the significance to children of darkness or
ghosts or ferocious animals or being attacked in the dark? In other
words, what is the underlying meaning, the mental representation, of
these fears.
   Rollo May in his lucid book on anxiety argues that Jersild's study
merely demonstrates that anxiety is converted into fear. 64 The child's
fears are often unpredictable and shifting and unrelated to reality (the
child is more likely, for example, to fear remote animals, like gorillas
and lions, than familiar ones). What appears as unpredictability on a
superficial level is, May argues, quite consistent on a deeper one: a
child's fears are "objectivated forms of underlying anxiety." May dis-
closes, "Jersild remarked to me in personal conversation that these
(children's) fears really expressed anxiety. He was surprised that he
had never seen this earlier. I think his not seeing it shows how hard it
is to get out of our traditional ways of thinking." 65
   Behavioral research has delineated many situations that arouse fear
in human children. The same question may be asked of this experimen-
tal data. Why does the child fear strangers, or a "visual cliff" (a glass ta-
ble with what appears to be a chasm underneath it), or an approaching
object (looming), or darkness? Obviously each of these situations-as
                                                                         101


                                                            I I DEATH
well as animals, ghosts, and separation-represents a threat to survival.
Yet with the exception of Melanie Klein and D. W. Winnicott, who em-
phasize that primal anxiety is anxiety about annihilation, ego dissolu-
tion, or being devoured, 66 the question, Why is the child fearful of
these life-threatening situations? is rarely asked. Child development-
alists or child analysts frequently draw highly inferential conclusions
about the inner life of the child when it involves object relations or in-
fantile sexuality; but, in considering the child's conception of death,
their intuition and imagination remain checked.
   The evidence for the existence of separation anxiety is based on solid
behavioral observations. Throughout the mammalian species a child
separated from its mother evinces signs of distress-both external mo-
toric signs and internal physiological ones. There is also no doubt, as
Bowlby ably demonstrates, that separation anxiety is evident early in
the life of the human infant, and that concerns about separation remain
a major motif in the inner world of adults.
   But what behavioral research cannot reveal is the nature of the
young child's inner experience or, as Anna Freud puts it, the "mental
representation" of the behavioral reaction. 67 It is possible to know what
evokes the apprehensiveness but not what the apprehensiveness is.
Empirical research demonstrates that the child is fearful when separat-
ed, but in no way demonstrates that separation anxiety is the primal
anxiety from which death anxiety is derived. At a level prior to
thought and language the child may experience the inchoate anxiety of
non being; and that anxiety, in the child as in the adult, seeks to be-
come fear: it is, in the only "language" available to the older child,
bound and transformed into separation anxiety. Developmentalists es-
chew the idea that a young child-say, before the age of thirty
months-could experience death anxiety, because the child has little
concept of a self that is separate from surrounding objects. But the same
may be said about separation anxiety. What is it that the child experi-
ences? Certainly not separation, because without a conception of self,
the child cannot conceive of separation. What is it, after all, that is be-
ing separated from what?
   There are limits to our knowing about an inner experience that can-
not be described, and in this discussion I run the peril of "adultomor-
phizing" the child's thought. It must be kept in mind that the term
"separation anxiety" is a convention, an agreed-upon term founded
upon empirical research, and refers to some ineffable inner state of ap-
prehensiveness. But for the adult it makes no sense whatever to trans-
late death anxiety into separation anxiety (or "fear of loss of object") or
102


3 I The Concept of Death in Children
to argue that death anxiety derives from a more "fundamental" separa-
tion anxiety. As I discussed in the previous chapter, one must distin-
guish between two meanings of "fundamental": "basic" and "chrono-
logically first." Even were we to accept the argument that separation
anxiety is chronologically the first anxiety, it would not follow that
death anxiety "really" is fear of object loss. The most fundamental (ba-
sic) anxiety issues from the threat of loss of self; and if one fears object
loss, one does so because loss of that object is a threat (or symbolizes a
threat) to one's survival.
   Why? The omission of death fear from dynamic theory is obviously
not oversight. Nor, as we have seen, is there substantial reason to justi-
fy translating this fear into other concepts. There is, I believe, an active
repressive process at work-a process that stems from the universal
tendency of mankind (including behavioral researchers and theoreti-
cians) to deny death-to deny it both personally and in life work. Oth-
ers who have studied the fear of death have arrived at a similar conclu-
sion. Anthony remarks:
       The illogicity and the patent insensibility (of child developmental re-
       searchers) to the phenomenon of man's fear of death, which anthropolo-
       gy and history have demonstrated to be one of the most common and
       powerful of human motivations, can be attributed only to conventional
       (i.e. culturally induced) repression of this fear by the writers themselves
       and those whose researches they report. 68
   Charles Wahl, in the same vein, comments:
       It is a surprising and significant fact that the phenomenon of the fear of
       death, or anxiety about it (thanato-phobia as it is called), while certainly
       no clinical rarity, has almost no description in the psychiatric or psy-
       choanalytic literature. It is conspicuous by its absence. Could this sug-
       gest that psychiatrists, no less than other mortal men, have a reluctance
       to consider or study a problem which is so closely and personally indica-
       tive of the contingency of the human estate? Perhaps they, no less than
       their patients, would seem to confirm de La Rochefoucauld's observation
       that "One cannot look directly at either the sun or death." 69
   Death Anxiety and the Development of Psychopathology
If death anxiety is a major factor in the development of psychopathol-
ogy, and if coming to terms with the concept of death is a major devel-
opmental task of every child, then why do some individuals develop
                                                                               103


                                                          I I DEATH
crippling neurotic disorders and others reach adulthood in relatively
well-integrated fashion? There is no empirical research to help answer
this question, and for the present I can do no more than suggest possi-
bilities. Undoubtedly a number of factors interact in a complex fashion.
There must be some "ideal" timing or sequence of developmental
events: the child must deal with the issues at a pace compatible with
his or her inner resources. "Too much, too soon" obviously creates an
imbalance. A child who is harshly confronted with death before hav-
ing developed appropriate defenses, may be severely stressed. Severe
stress, unpleasant at all times of life, has for the young child implica-
tions that transcend transient dysphora. Freud, for example, spoke of
the disproportionately severe and enduring damage to the ego caused
by massive trauma early in life, and cited, by way of illustration, an ex-
periment in biology which demonstrated the catastrophic effects on an
adult organism caused by the tiny prick of a needle into the embryo at
the very beginning of its development. 70
   What type of trauma may be involved? Several obvious possibilities
present themselves. Exposure to death in the child's environment is an
important event; some types of contact with death may-in proper dos-
age and in the presence of already existing ego resources, salubrious
constitutional factors, and supportive adults who are themselves able
to deal adaptively with death anxiety-result in innoculation, whereas
some types may exceed the child's capacity to shield himself or herself.
Every child is exposed to death in encounters with insects, flowers,
pets, and other small animals, and these deaths may be sources of puz-
zlement or anxiety and stimulate the child to discuss with his or her
parents questions and fears about death. But for a child faced with the
death of a human, the possibility of trauma is much greater.
   The death of another child is, as I have discussed, especially fright-
ening because it undermines the consoling belief that only very old
people die. The death of a sibling, who is both young and important to
the child, is a major trauma. The child's reaction may be very complex,
for several issues are involved: guilt emanating from sibling rivalry
(and from the pleasure of commanding more parental attention), loss,
and the evocation of fear of one's personal death. The literature deals
primarily with the first issue, guilt, and occasionally with the second,
loss, but almost never with the third. For example, Rosenzweig and
Bray presents data that indicates that among schizophrenic patients,
when compared with a normal population, with a manic-depressive
sample, and with a general paretic sample, there is a significantly
greater incidence of a sibling dying before a patient's sixth year. 71
104


3 I The Concept of Death in Children
   Rosenzweig offers the standard analytic interpretation of this re-
sult-namely, that overwhelming guilt ensuing from inter-sibling hos-
tility and incestuous feelings is a significant factor in the production of
schizophrenic behavior patterns. To support this conclusion, he pre-
sents three brief (one paragraph) case reports. Despite the brevity of
the reports and the selection from a huge sample of clinical material to
support his thesis, there is evidence of fear of personal death in two of
the three vignettes. One patient who had lost his mother and two sibs
early in life responded strongly to the death of a cousin: "He was so
deeply disturbed that he became ill and had to go to bed: he feared per-
sistently that he was going to die. The doctor gave the diagnosis of a
nervous breakdown. The patient soon began to display bizarre behav-
ior of a schizophrenic kind." 72 Another patient lost three brothers, the
first when he was six years old. He developed a psychosis at seventeen,
shortly after the death of the third brother. The only statement quoted
from the patient suggests that more than guilt was involved in his reac-
tion to the death. "I've heard his voice occasionally. I almost seem to be
him at times. I don't know, there's some void that seems to be in the
way .... WelL how can I get over a void like his death? My brother's
dead and I'm-well I'm alive, but I don't know ...." 73 This highly se-
lective form of case report proves nothing. I belabor the point to illus-
trate the problems of interpreting the research literature. Researchers
and clinicians become "grooved" and have difficulty changing set
even when, as in this research, another explanation seems entirely
plausible and consistent with the data.
   If one considers loss of a parent as well as loss of a sibling, then one
finds in Rosenzweig's research that over 60 percent of schizophrenic pa-
tients suffered an early loss. Perhaps, then, schizophrenic patients have
had "too much, too soon." Not only did these patients have too much
exposure to death but, because of the degree of pathology in the family
environment, the families and the patients were particularly unable to
cope with death anxiety. (Harold Searles, as I will discuss in chapter 4,
reached the same conclusions based on his psychotherapeutic work
with adult schizophrenic patients.74 )
   The death of a parent is a catastrophic event for the child. The latter's
reactions depend upon a number of factors: the quality of his relation-
ship to the parent, the circumstances of the parent's death (was, for ex-
ample, the child witness to a natural or a violent death?), the parent's
attitude during his or her final illness, and the existence of a strong
surviving parent and a network of community and family resources. 75
The child suffers a deep loss and, furthermore, is extraordinarily beset
                                                                        105


                                                               I I DEATH
with concern that his or her aggressive behavior or fantasies concern-
ing the parent may have been instrumental in the latter's death. The
role of loss and guilt is well known and has been competently dis-
cussed by others. 76 Omitted from traditional bereavement literature,
however, is a consideration of the impact of a parent's death upon the
child's awareness of his or her own death. As I have emphasized pre-
viously, annihilation is the individual's primary dread and supplies
much of the anguish in his or her reaction to the loss of another.
Maurer puts it well: "At some level below true cognition, the child
with naive narcissism 'knows' that the loss of his parents is the loss of
his tie to life .... Total terror for his life rather than jealous possessive-
ness of a lost love object is the etiology of the distress of separation
anxiety." 77
    It is not difficult to demonstrate that psychiatric patients, neurotic
and psychotic, have lost a parent more frequently than have individ-
 uals in the general population.78 But the implications of a parent's
death for the child are so extensive that it is not possible for research to
disentangle and to assign weight to all the separate components of the
 experience. It is known, for example, from animal experimentation that
 the young, if separated from their mothers, will develop an experimen-
 tal neurosis and respond far more adversely to stress than do those who
 remain with their mothers. In humans the immediate presence of a ma-
 ternal figure lessens anxiety caused by unfamiliar events. It follows
 then that a child who has lost a mother is far more vulnerable to all the
 stresses he or she must face. The child is not only exposed to anxiety
 emanating from death awareness but suffers inordinately with anxiety
 from many other stresses (interpersonal, sexuaL school-related) with
 which he or she is poorly able to cope. Thus the child is likely to devel-
 op symptomatology and neurotic mechanisms of defense which will be
 layered, one upon the other, as he or she proceeds in life. The fear of
 personal death may rest at the deepest layers, breaking through in un-
 disguised form only rarely in nightmares or other expressions of the
 unconscious.
    Josephine Hilgard and Martha Newman studied psychiatric patients
 who had lost a parent early in life, and reported an intriguing finding
 (which they termed the "anniversary reaction"): a significant correla-
 tion between a patient's age at psychiatric hospitalization and his or
 her parent's age at death. 79 In other words, when a patient is hospital-
 ized there is a greater-than-chance possibility that he or she will be the
 same age as his or her parent was when the latter died. For example, if
 a patient's mother died at the age of thirty, the patient is "at risk" at the
 106


3 I The Concept of Death in Children
age of thirty. Furthermore, the patient's oldest child is likely to be the
same age as the patient was when the parent died. For example, a pa-
tient who was six years old when her mother died, is "at risk" psychiat-
rically when her oldest daughter is six years old. Though the research-
ers did not raise the issue of death anxiety, it would seem possible that
the death of the original mother hurled the child-the later patient-
into a confrontation with contingency: the mother's death signaled to
the child that she, too, must die. The child repressed this conclusion,
and its associated anxiety, which remained unconscious until triggered
by the anniversary-by the patient's attaining the age when her parent
died.
   The degree of trauma is to a large extent a function of a family's de-
gree of anxiety about death. Children in many cultures participate in
rituals surrounding the dead. They may have assigned roles in funerals
or other death rituals. In the Fore culture of New Guinea, for example,
children participate in the ritual devouring of a dead relative. Most
likely this experience is not catastrophic for the child because the
adults participate in the activities without severe anxiety; it is part of a
naturaL un-selfconscious stream of life. However, if, as is often true in
Western culture today, a parent experiences severe anxiety about the
issue of death, then the child is given the message that there is much to
fear. This parental communication may be especially important for
those children who have severe physical illness. As Marian Brecken-
ridge and E. Lee Vincent put it, "The children feel the anxiety of their
parents that they may die, and hence tend to carry a vague uneasiness
which healthy children do not experience." 80
                  The Death Education of Children
Many parents, perhaps most, in our culture attempt gradually to esca-
late reality in regard to death education. Young children are shielded
from death; they are explicitly misinformed; denial is implanted early
in life with tales of heaven, or of return of the dead, or with assurances
that children do not die. Later, when the child is "ready to take it," a
parent gradually increases the dose of reality. Occasionally, enlight-
ened parents take a determined stand against self-deception and refuse
to teach their children to negate reality. They find it difficult, however,
                                                                        107


                                                               I I DEATH
when a child is frightened or anguished, to refrain from offering solace
through some reality-negating reassurance-either a flat denial of mor-
tality or a "long journey" afterlife myth.
   Elisabeth Kiibler-Ross disapproves strongly of traditional religion's
practice of indoctrinating children with "fairy tales" of heaven, God,
and angels. Yet when she describes her work with children who are
concerned about death-their own or their parents-it is obvious that
she, too, offers denial-based consolation. She informs children that at
the moment of death one is transformed or liberated "like a butterfly"
to a comforting, beckoning future. 81 Although Kiibler-Ross insists that
this is not denial but instead is reality based on objective research on
life-after-death-experiences, the empirical evidence remains unpub-
lished. The current position of this remarkable therapist who once con-
fronted death unflinchingly indicates how difficult it is to face death
without self deception. Insofar as I can judge, Kiibler-Ross's "objective
data" differ in no significant manner from traditional religion's
"knowing" through faith.
   There exist clear educational guidelines in our Western culture for
such areas as physical development, information acquisition, social
skills, and psychological development; but when it comes to death edu-
cation, parents are very much on their own. Many other cultures offer
some culturally sanctioned myths about death which, with no ambiva-
lence or anxiety, are transmitted to the children. Our culture offers no
identifiable guidelines for parents to follow; despite the universality of
the issue and its crucial importance in the development of the child,
each family must determine, willy-nilly, what to teach their children.
Often the child is given information that is obscure, commingled with
parental anxiety, and likely to be contradicted by other sources of in-
formation in the environment.
   There is sharp disagreement about death education within the ranks
of professional educators. Anthony recommends that parents negate
reality to the child. She quotes Sandor Ferenczi who said that "nega-
tion of reality is a transition phase between ignoring and accepting re-
ality," and suggests that parents' failure to assist the child's denial may
result "in a neurosis in which death-associations played a part." 82 An-
thony continues:
        The arguments in favour of supporting reality-acceptance are strong.
       Nevertheless in this context there is a danger in doing so. The knowl-
       edge that the denial is itself an easing of acceptance may make the par-
       ent's task easier. He may anticipate a charge of unreliability, of lying,
       when the child's own need for denial is past. If openly accused, he may
       answer, "You could not take it, then." 83
108


3 I The Concept of Death in Children
   On the other hand, many professional educators accept Jerome
Bruner's view that "any subject can be taught effectively in some intel-
lectually honest form to any child at any stage of development," 8• and
attempt to assist the child's gradual realistic understanding of the con-
cept of death. Euphemisms ("gone to sleep," "went to heaven," "is
with the angels") are "wafer-thin barricades against death fears and
only bewilder the child." 86 Ignoring the issue results in a fool's para-
dise for parents: children do not ignore the issue and, as is true for sex,
find other sources of information that are often unreliable or are even
more frightening or bizarre than reality.
   In summary, there is convincing evidence that children discover
death at an early age, that they apprehend that life will ultimately be
extinguished, that they apply this knowledge to themselves, and that
as a result of this discovery they suffer great anxiety. A major develop-
mental task is to deal with this anxiety, and the child does so in two
major ways: by altering the intolerable objective reality of death and by
altering inner subjective experience. The child denies the inevitability
and the permanence of death. He or she creates immortality myths-or
gratefully embraces myths offered by elders. The child also denies his
or her own helplessness before the presence of death by altering inner
reality: the child believes both in his or her personal specialness, om-
nipotence, and invulnerability and in the existence of some external
personal force or being that will deliver him or her from the fate that
awaits all others.
   "What is remarkable is," as Rochlin states, "not that children arrive
at adult views of the cessation of life, but rather how tenaciously
throughout life adults hold to the child's beliefs and how readily they
revert to them." 86 Thus, the dead are not dead; they rest, they slumber
on in memorial parks to the sound of eternal music, they enjoy an
afterlife in which they will ultimately be reunited with their loved
ones. And, regardless of what happens to others, one as an adult denies
death for oneself. The mechanisms of denial are incorporated into
one's life style and character structure. The individual's burden, as an
ad.ult no less than as a child, is to deal with personal finiteness; and the
study of psychopathology, to which I now turn, is the study of failed
death transcendence.
                                                                         109


                 CHAPTER 4
                             Death
        and Psychopathology
l~m      RANGE of psychopathology, the types of clinical picture with
which patients present, is so broad that clinicians require some orga-
nizing principle that will permit them to cluster symptoms, behaviors,
and characterological styles into meaningful categories. To the extent
that clinicians can apply some structuring paradigm of psychopathol-
ogy, they are relieved of the anxiety of facing an inchoate situation.
They develop a sense of recognition or of familiarity and a sense of
mastery which, in turn, engender in patients a sense of confidence and
trust-prerequisites for a truly therapeutic relationship.
   The paradigm that I shall describe in this chapter rests, as do most
paradigms of psychopathology, on the assumption that psychopathol-
ogy is a graceless, inefficient mode of coping with anxiety. An existen-
tial paradigm assumes that anxiety emanates from the individual's con-
frontation with the ultimate concerns in existence. I shall present in
this chapter a model of psychopathology based upon the individual's
struggle with death anxiety, and in later chapters models applicable to
patients whose anxiety is more closely related to other ultimate con-
cerns-freedom, isolation and meaninglessness. Though for didactic
purposes I must discuss these concerns separately, all four represent
strands in the cable of existence, and all must eventually be recom-
bined into a unified existential model of psychopathology.
   All individuals are confronted with death anxiety; most develop
110


4 I Death and Psychopathology
adaptive coping modes-modes that consist of denial-based strategies
such as suppression, repression, displacement, belief in personal om-
nipotence, acceptance of socially sanctioned religious beliefs that "de-
toxify" death, or personal efforts to overcome death through a wide va-
riety of strategies that aim at achieving symbolic immortality.
   Either because of extraordinary stress or because of an inadequacy of
available defensive strategies, the individual who enters the realm
called "patienthood" has found insufficient the universal modes of
dealing with death fear and has been driven to extreme modes of de-
fense. These defensive maneuvers, often clumsy modes of dealing with
terror, constitute the presenting clinical picture.
   Psychopathology (in every system) is, by definition, an ineffective de-
fensive mode. Even defensive maneuvers that successfully ward off se-
vere anxiety, prevent growth and result in a constricted and unsatisfy-
ing life. Many existential theorists have commented upon the high
price exacted in the struggle to cope with death anxiety. Kierkegaard
knew that man limited and diminished himself in order to avoid per-
ception of the "terror, perdition and annihilation that dwell next door
to any man.''l Otto Rank described the neurotic as one "who refused
the loan (life) in order to avoid the payment of the debt (death)." 2 Paul
Tillich stated that "neurosis is the way of avoiding non-being by avoid-
ing being." 3 Ernest Becker made a similar point when he wrote: "The
irony of man's condition is that the deepest need is to be free of the
anxiety of death and annihilation; but it is life itself which awakens it
and so we must shrink from being fully alive." 4 Robert Jay Lifton used
the term "psychic numbing" to describe how the neurotic individual
shields himself from death anxiety. 5
   Naked death anxiety will not be easily apparent in the paradigm of
psychopathology I shall describe. But that should not surprise us: pri-
mary anxiety in pristine form is rarely visible in any theoretical system.
The defensive structures exist for the very purpose of internal camou-
flage: the nature of the core dynamic conflict is concealed by repres-
sion and other dysphoria-reducing maneuvers. Eventually the core
conflict is deeply buried and can be inferred-though never wholly
known-only after laborious analysis of these maneuvers.
   To take one example: an individual may guard himself from the
death anxiety inherent in individuation by maintaining a symbiotic tie
with mother. This defensive strategy may succeed temporarily, but as
time passes, it will itself become a source of secondary anxiety; for ex-
ample, the reluctance to separate from mother may interfere with at-
tendance at school or the development of social skills; and these defi-
                                                                       111


                                                           I I DEATH
ciencies are likely to beget social anxiety and self-contempt which, in
turn, may give birth to new defenses which temper dysphoria but re-
tard growth and accordingly generate additional layers of anxiety and
defense. Soon the core conflict is heavily encrusted with these epi-
phenomena, and the excavation of the primary anxiety becomes ex-
ceedingly difficult. Death anxiety is not immediately apparent to the
clinician: it is discovered through a study of dreams, fantasies, or psy-
chotic utterances or through painstaking analysis of the onset of neu-
rotic symptoms. For example, Lewis Loesser and Thea Bry 6 report that
first phobic attacks that are analyzed carefully are invariably character-
ized by a breakthrough of death anxiety. The understanding of later at-
tacks is confounded by the presence of elaborations, substitutions, and
displacements.
   The derivative, secondary forms of anxiety are nonetheless "real"
anxiety. An individual may be brought down by social anxiety or by
pervasive self-contempt; and, as we shall see in the next chapter, treat-
ment efforts generally are directed toward derivative rather than
toward primary anxiety. The psychotherapist, regardless of his or her
belief system concerning the primary source of anxiety and the genesis
of psychopathology, begins therapy at the level of the patient's con-
cerns: for example, the therapist may assist the patient by offering sup-
port, by propping up adaptive defenses, or by helping to correct de-
structive interpersonal modes of interaction. Thus in the treatment of
many patients the existential paradigm of psychopathology does not
call for a radical departure from traditional therapeutic strategies or
techniques.
         Death Anxiety: A Paradigm of Psychopathology
A clinical paradigm that I believe to be of considerable practical and
heuristic value was adumbrated in the previous chapter. The child's
mode of coping with the awareness of death is denial-based, and the
two major bulwarks of that denial system are the archaic beliefs that
one is either personally inviolable and/ or protected eternally by an ul-
timate rescuer. These two beliefs are particularly powerful because
they receive reinforcement from two sources: from the circumstances
of early life, and from widespread culturally sanctioned myths involv-
112


 4 I Death and Psychopathology
ing immortality systems and the existence of a personaL observing
deity.
   The clinical expression of these two fundamental defenses became
particularly clear to me one day when I saw two patients, whom I shall
call Mike and Sam, in two successive hours. They provide a powerful
study in the two modes of death denial; the contrast between the two is
striking; and each, by illustrating the opposite possibility, sheds light
on the dynamics of the other.
   Mike, who was twenty-five years old and had been referred to me by
an oncologist, had a highly malignant lymphoma and, though a new
form of chemotherapy offered his only chance for survivaL he refused
to cooperate in treatment. I saw Mike only once (and he was fifteen
minutes late for that meeting), but it was readily apparent that the
guiding motif of his life was individuation. Early in life he had strug-
gled against any form of control and developed remarkable skills at
self-sufficiency. Since the age of twelve he had supported himself, and
at fifteen he moved out of his parental home. After high school he
went into contracting and soon mastered all aspects of the trade-car-
pentry, electrical work, plumbing, masonry. He built several houses,
sold them at substantial profits, bought a boat, married, and sailed with
his wife around the world. He was attracted to the self-sufficient indi-
vidualistic culture that he had found in an underdeveloped country,
and was preparing to emigrate when, four months before I saw him,
his cancer was discovered.
   The most striking feature of the interview was Mike's irrational atti-
tude toward the chemotherapy treatment. True, the treatment was
markedly unpleasant, causing severe nausea and vomiting, but Mike's
fear exceeded all reasonable bounds: he could not sleep the night be-
fore treatment; he developed a severe anxiety state and obsessed about
methods of avoiding treatment. What was it precisely that Mike feared
about the treatment? He could not specify, but he did know that it had
something to do with immobility and helplessness. He could not bear
to wait while the oncologist prepared his medication for injection. (It
could not be done in advance, since the dosage depended upon his
blood count, which had to be examined before each administration.)
Most terrible of alL however, was the intravenous: he hated the pene-
tration of the needle, the taping, the sight of the drops entering his
body. He hated to be helpless and restrained, to lie quietly on the cot,
to keep his arm immobile. Though Mike did not consciously fear death,
his fear of therapy was an obvious displacement of death anxiety. What
was truly dreadful for Mike was to be dependent and static: these con-
                                                                      113


                                                            I  I DEATH
ditions ignited terror, they were death equivalents; and most of his life
he had overcome them by a consummate self-reliance. He believed
deeply in his specialness and his invulnerability and had, until the
cancer, created a life that reinforced this belief.
   I could do little for Mike except to suggest to his oncologist that
Mike be taught to prepare his own medications and be permitted to
monitor and adjust his own intravenous. These suggestions helped,
and Mike finished his course of treatment. He did not keep his next ap-
pointment with me but called to ask for a self-help muscle-relaxation
cassette. He chose not to remain in the area for the oncological follow-
up and decided to pursue his plans to emigrate. His wife so disap-
proved of his plan that she refused to go, and Mike set sail alone.
   Sam was approximately the same age as Mike but resembled him in
no other way. He came to see me in extremis following his wife's deci-
sion to leave him. Though he was not, like Mike, confronted with
death in a literal sense, Sam's situation was similar on a symbolic level.
His behavior suggested that he faced an extraordinarily severe threat to
his survival: he was anxious to the point of panic, he wailed for hours
on end, he could not sleep or eat, he longed for surcease at any cost and
seriously contemplated suicide. As the weeks passed, Sam's catastroph-
ic reaction subsided, but his discomfort lingered. He thought about his
wife continuously. He did not, as he stated, "live in life" but slunk
about outside life. "Passing time" became a conscious and serious prop-
osition: crossword puzzles, television, newspapers, magazines were
seen in their true nature-as vehicles for filling the void, for getting
time over with as painlessly as possible.
   Sam's character structure can be understood around the motif of "fu-
sion" -a motif dramatically opposed to Mike's of "individuation."
During the Second World War, Sam's family had, when he was very
young, moved many times to escape danger. He had suffered many
losses, including the death of his father when Sam was a preadolescent
and the death of his mother a few years later. He dealt with his situa-
tion by forming close, intense ties: first with his mother and then with
a series of relatives or adopted relatives. He was everyone's handyman
and perpetual babysitter. He was an inveterate gift giver, bestowing
generous amounts of time and money on a large number of adults.
Nothing seemed more important to Sam than to be loved and cared for.
In fact, after his wife left him, he realized that he felt he existed only if
he were loved: in a state of isolation he froze, much like a terrified ani-
maL into a state of suspended animation-not living but not dying ei-
ther. Once when we talked about his pain following his wife's depar-
ture, he said, "When I'm sitting home alone, the most difficult thing is
114


4 I Death and Psychopathology
to think that no one really knows I'm alive." When alone, he scarcely
ate or sought to satisfy any but the most primitive needs. He did not
clean his house, he did not wash, he did not read; though he was a tal-
ented artist, he did not paint. There was, as Sam put it, no point in "ex-
pending energy unless I am certain it will be returned to me by an-
other." He did not exist unless someone was there to validate his
existence. When alone, Sam transformed himself into a spore, dormant
until another person supplied life-restoring energy.
   In his time of need Sam sought help from the elders in his life: he
flew across the country for the solace of a few hours in the home of
adopted relatives; he received support by simply standing outside the
house he and his mother had once lived in for four years; he ran up as-
tronomical phone bills soliciting advice and comfort; he received much
support from his in-laws who, because of Sam's devotion to them,
threw their lot (and love) in with Sam rather than with their daughter.
Sam's efforts to help himself in his crisis were considerable but mon-
othematic: he sought in a number of ways to reinforce his beliefs that
some protective figure watched over and cared for him.
   Despite his extreme loneliness, Sam was willing to take no steps to
alleviate it. I made a number of practical suggestions about how he
might meet friends: singles' events, church social activities, Sierra Club
events, adult education courses, and so forth. My advice, much to my
puzzlement, went completely unheeded. Gradually I understood: what
was important for Sam was not, despite his loneliness, to be with oth-
ers but to confirm his faith in an ultimate rescuer. He was explicit in
his unwillingness to spend time away from his home on singles or dat-
ing activities. The reason? He was afraid of missing a phone call! One
phone call from "out there" was infinitely more precious th;m joining
dozens of social activities. Above alL Sam wanted to be "found," to be
protected, to be saved without having to ask for help and without hav-
ing to engineer his own rescue. In fact, at a deep leveL Sam was made
more uncomfortable by successful efforts to assume responsibility for
helping himself out of his life predicament. I saw Sam over a four-
month period. As he became more comfortable (through my support
and through "fusion" with another woman), he obviously lost motiva-
tion for continued psychotherapeutic work, and we both agreed that
termination was in order.
TWO FUNDAMENTAL DEFENSES AGAINST DEATH
   What do we learn from Mike and Sam? We see clearly two radically
different modes of coping with fundamental anxiety. Mike believed
deeply in his specialness and personal inviolability; Sam put faith in
                                                                       115


                                                            I I DEATH
the existence of an ultimate rescuer. Mike's sense of self-sufficiency
was hypertrophied, while Sam did not exist alone but strove to fuse
with another. These two modes are diametrically opposed; and, though
by no means mutually exclusive, they constitute a useful dialectic
which permits the clinician to understand a wide variety of clinical
situations.
   We meet Mike and Sam in a time of urgent experience. In neither
man does the crisis elicit new defenses; in the starkest possible manner,
it highlights the nature and the limitations of their modes of being. Ex-
treme adherence to either an individuation or a fusion mode results in
a characterological rigidity that is obviously maladaptive. Mike and
Sam exhibit extreme styles that increase stress, prevent coping, and re-
tard growth. Mike refused to participate in a life-saving therapy and
later refused follow-up evaluation. Sam's intense desire for all of his
wife's attention was responsible for her decision to leave; his passion
for fusion resulted in an augm_entation of the pain of loneliness and in
an inability to cope resourcefully with his new situation in life. Nei-
ther Mike nor Sam was able to grow in any way as a result of their cri-
ses. Maladaptive and rigid behavior that precludes personal growth is,
by definition, neurotic behavior.
   In a crude, sweeping way, the two defenses constitute a dialectic-
two diametrically opposed modes of facing the human situation. The
human being either fuses or separates, embeds or emerges. He affirms
his autonomy by "standing out from nature" (as Rank put it'), or seeks
safety by merging with another force. Either he becomes his own fa-
ther or he remains the eternal son. Surely this is what Fromm meant
when he described man as either "longing for submission or lusting
for power." 8
   This existential dialectic offers one paradigm that permits the clini-
cian to "grasp" the situation. There are many alternate paradigms, each
with explanatory power: Mike and Sam have character disorders-
schizoid and passive-dependency, respectively. Mike can be viewed
from the vantage points of a continued rebellious conflict with his par-
ents, of counterdependency, of neurotic perpetuation of the oedipal
struggle, or of homosexual panic. Sam can be "grasped" from the van-
tage points of identification with Mother and unresolved grief, or of
castration anxiety, or from a family dynamic one in which the clinician
focuses attention on Sam's interaction with his wife.
   The existential approach is, therefore, one paradigm among many,
and its raison d'etre is its clinical usefulness. This dialectic permits the
therapist to comprehend data often overlooked in clinical work. The
116


4 I Death and Psychopathology
 therapist may, for example, understand why Mike and Sam responded
 so powerfully and manneristically to their painful situations, or why
Sam balked at the prospect of "improving" his situation by the assump-
 tion of responsibility for himself. This dialectic permits the therapist to
 engage the patient on the deepest of levels. It is based on an under-
 standing of primary anxiety that exists in the immediate present: the
 therapist views the patient's symptoms as a response to death anxiety
 that currently threatens, not as a response to the evocation of past trau-
 ma and stress. Hence, the approach emphasizes awareness, immediacy,
 and choice-an emphasis that enhances the therapist's leverage.
    I shalL in the remainder of this chapter, describe these two basic
forms of death denial and the types of psychopathology that spring
from them. (Though many of the familiar clinical syndromes can be
viewed and understood in terms of these basic denials of death, I make
 no pretense of an exhaustive classifying system-that would suggest
greater precision and comprehensiveness than is the case.) Both beliefs,
 in specialness and in an ultimate rescuer, can be highly adaptive. Each,
 however, may be overloaded and stretched thin, to a point where adap-
 tation breaks down, anxiety leaks through, the individual resorts to ex-
 treme measures to protect himself or herself, and psychopathology ap-
pears in the form of either defense breakdown or defense runaway.
   For the sake of clarity I shall first discuss each defense separately. I
shall then need to integrate them again because they are intricately in-
 terdependent: the great majority of individuals have traces of both de-
fenses woven into their character structures.
                                 Specialness
No one has ever described the deep irrational belief in our own spe-
cialness more powerfully or poignantly than Tolstoy who, through the
lips of Ivan Ilyich, says:
          In the depth of his heart he knew he was dying, but not only was he
       not accustomed to the thought, he simply did not and could not grasp it.
          The syllogism he had learnt from Kiezewetter's Logic: "Caius is a
       man, men are mortal, therefore Caius is mortal," had always seemed to
       him correct as applied to Caius, but certainly not as applied to himself.
       That Caius-man in the abstract-was mortal, was perfectly correct, but
                                                                            117


                                                                1/DEATH
       he was not Caius, not an abstract man, but a creature quite, quite sepa-
       rate from all others. He had been little Vanya, with a mamma and a
       papa, with Mitya and Volodya, with the toys, a coachman and a nurse,
       afterwards with Katenka and with all the joys, griefs, and delights of
       childhood, boyhood, and youth. What did Caius know of the smell of
       that striped leather ball Vanya had been so fond of? Had Caius kissed his
       mother's hand like that, and did the silk of her dress rustle so for Caius?
       Had he rioted like that at school when the pastry was bad? Had Caius
       been in love like that? Could Caius preside at a session as he did? "Caius
       really was mortal, and it was right for him to die; but for me, little
       Vanya, Ivan Ilyich, with all my thoughts and emotions, it's altogether a
       different matter. It cannot be that I ought to die. That would be too
       terrible."•
   We all know that in the basic boundaries of existence we are no dif-
ferent from others. No one at a conscious level denies that. Yet deep,
deep down each of us believes, as does Ivan Ilyich, that the rule of mor-
tality applies to others but certainly not to ourselves. Occasionally one
is caught off guard when this belief pops into consciousness, and is
surprised by one's own irrationality. Recently, for example, I visited
my optometrist to complain that my eyeglasses no longer functioned as
of yore. He examined me and asked my age. "Forty-eight," I said, and
he replied, "Yep, right on schedule." From somewhere deep inside the
thought welled up and hissed: "What schedule? Who's on schedule?
You or others may be on a schedule, but certainly not I."
   When an individual learns he or she has some serious illness-for
example, cancer-the first reaction is generally some form of denial.
The denial is an effort to cope with anxiety associated with the threat
to life, but also it is a function of a deep belief in one's inviolability.
Much psychological work must be done to restructure one's lifelong as-
sumptive world. Once the defense is truly undermined, once the indi-
vidual really grasps, "My God, I'm really going to die," and realizes
that life will deal with him or her in the same harsh way as it deals
with others, he or she feels lost and, in some odd way, betrayed.
   In my work with terminally ill cancer patients I have observed that
individuals vary enormously in their willingness to know about their
deaths. Many patients for some time do not hear their physician tell
them their prognosis. Much internal restructuring must be done to al-
low the knowledge to take hold. Some patients become aware of their
deaths and face death anxiety in staccato fashion-a brief moment of
awareness, brief terror, denial, internal processing, and then prepared-
ness for more information. For others the awareness of death and the
associated anxiety flood in with a terrible rush.
118


4 I Death and Psychopathology
   One of my patients, Pam, a twenty-eight-year-old woman with cervi-
cal cancer, had her myth of specialness destroyed in a striking fashion.
After an exploratory laparotomy, her surgeon visited her and informed
her that her condition was grave indeed, and that her life expectancy
was in the neighborhood of six months. An hour later Pam was visited
by a team of radiotherapists who had obviously not communicated
with the surgeon, and who informed her that they planned to radiate
her and that they were "going for a cure." She chose to believe her sec-
ond visitors, but unfortunately her surgeon, unbeknownst to her,
spoke with her parents in the waiting room and gave them the original
message-namely, that she had six months to live.
   Pam spent the next few months convalescing at her parents' home in
the most unreal of environments. Her parents treated her as though
she were going to be dead in six months. They insulated themselves
and the world from her; they monitored her phone calls to screen out
unsettling communications; in short, they made her "comfortable." Fi-
nally Pam confronted her parents and demanded to know what in
God's name was going on. Her parents told her about their conversa-
tion with the surgeon; Pam referred them to the radiotherapist, and the
misunderstanding was quickly cleared up.
   Pam, however, was deeply shaken by the experience. The confronta-
tion with her parents made her realize, in a way that a death sentence
from the surgeon had not, that she was indeed veering toward death.
Her comments at this time are revealing:
      "I did seem to be getting better and it was a happier situation but they
      began to treat me like I was not going to live and I was stung into this
      terrible feeling of realization that they had already accepted my death. Be-
      cause of an error and a miscommunication I was already dead to my fam-
      ily, and I started being dead and it was a very hard way back to get my-
      self to be alive. It was worse later on as I was getting better than it was
      when I was very sick because when the family suddenly realized that I
      was getting better then they left and went back to their daily chores and
      I was still left with being dead and I couldn't handle it very well. I'm
      still frightened and trying to cross the boundary line that seems to be in
      front of me-the boundary line of, am I dead or am I alive?"
   The point is that Pam truly understood what it meant to die not from
anything her doctors told her but from the crushing realization that
her parents would continue to live without her and that the world
would go on as before-that, as she put it, the good times would go on
without her.
   Another patient with widespread metastatic cancer had arrived at the
                                                                              119


                                                           I I DEATH
same point when she wrote a letter to her children instructing them
how to divide some personal belongings of sentimental value. She had
rather mechanically performed the other dreary administrative chores
of dying-the writing of a wilL the purchase of a burial plot, the ap-
pointment of an executor-but it was the personal letter to her chil-
dren that made death real to her. It was the simple but dreadful realiza-
tion that when her children read her letter she would no longer exist:
neither to respond to them, to observe their reactions, to guide them;
they would be there but she would be nothing at all.
   Another patient, after months of procrastination, arrived at the pain-
ful decision to discuss with her teen-age sons the fact that she had ad-
vanced cancer and not long to live. Her sons responded with sadness
but with courage and self-sufficiency. A bit too much courage and self-
sufficiency for her: in some far-off place in her mind she could feel
some pride-she had done what a good parent must do, and they would
pattern their lives along the lines she had laid out for them-but they
took her death too well; and, though she hated her irrationality, she
was troubled because they would persist and thrive without her.
   Another patient, Jan, had breast cancer that had spread to her brain.
Her doctors had forewarned her of paralysis. She heard their words but
at a deep level felt smugly immune to this possibility. When the inexo-
rable weakness and paralysis ensued, Jan realized in a sudden rush that
her "specialness" was a myth. There was, she learned, no "escape
clause." She said all this during a group therapy meeting and then add-
ed that she had discovered a powerful truth in the last week-a truth
that made the ground shake under her. She had been musing to herself
about her preferred life span-seventy would be about right, eighty
might be too old-and then suddenly she realized, "When it comes to
aging and when it comes to dying, what I wish has absolutely nothing to do
with it."
   Perhaps these clinical illustrations begin to transmit something of
the difference between knowing and truly knowing, between the ev-
eryday awareness of death we all possess and the full facing of "my
death." Accepting one's personal death means facing a number of other
unpalatable truths, each of which has its own force-field of anxiety:
that one is finite; that one's life really comes to an end; that the world
will persist nonetheless; that one is one of many-no more, no less;
that the universe does not acknowledge one's specialness; that all our
lives we have carried counterfeit vouchers; and, finally, certain stark
immutable dimensions of existence are beyond one's influence. In fact,
what one wishes "has absolutely nothing to do with it."
120


4 I Death and Psychopathology
   When an individual arrives at the discovery that personal specialness
is mythic, he or she feels angry and betrayed by life. Surely this sense
of betrayal is what Robert Frost had in mind when he wrote: "Forgive,
0 Lord, my little jokes on Thee I And I'll forgive Thy great big one on
me."to
   Many people feel that if they had only known, really known, earlier
they would have lived their lives differently. They feel angry; yet the
rage is impotent, for it has no reasonable object. (The physician is, inci-
dentally, often a target for displaced anger, and especially for that of so
many dying patients.)
   The belief in personal specialness is extraordinarily adaptive and
permits us to emerge from nature and to tolerate the accompanying
dysphoria: the isolation; the awareness of our smallness and the
awesomeness of the external world, of our parents' inadequacies, of our
creatureliness, of the bodily functions that tie us to nature; and, most
of all, the knowledge of the death which rumbles unceasingly at the
edge of consciousness. Our belief in exemption from natural law
underlies many aspects of our behavior. It enhances courage in that it
permits us to encounter danger without being overwhelmed by the
threat of personal extinction. Witness the psalmist who wrote, "A thou-
sand shall fall at thy right hand, ten thousand at thy left, but death
shall not come nigh thee." The courage thus generated begets what
many have called the human being's "natural" striving for compe-
tence, effectance, power, and control. To the extent that one attains
power, one's death fear is further assuaged and belief in one's special-
ness further reinforced. Getting ahead, achieving, accumulating mate-
rial wealth, leaving works behind as imperishable monuments be-
comes a way of life which effectively conceals the mortal questions
churning below.
COMPULSIVE HEROISM
   For many of us, heroic individuation represents the best that man
can do in light of his existential situation. The Greek writer, Nikos Ka-
zantzakis was such a spirit, and his Zorba was the quintessential, self-
sufficient man. (In his autobiography Kazantzakis cites the last words
of the man who was his model for Zorba the Greek: " ... if any priest
comes to confess me and give me communion, tell him to make himself
scarce, and may he give me his curse! ... Men like me should live a
thousand years." 11 ) Elsewhere, through the lips of his Ulysses, Kazant-
zakis advises us to live life so completely that we leave death nothing
but a "burned-out castle." 12 His own tombstone on the ramparts of Her-
                                                                       121


                                                          I I DEATH
akleion bears the simple heroic epitaph: "I want nothing, I fear noth-
ing, I am free."
   Push it a bit farther though, and the defense becomes overextended:
the heroic pose caves in on itself, and the hero becomes a compulsive
hero who, like Mike, the young man with cancer, is driven to face dan-
ger in order to escape a greater danger within. Ernest Hemingway, the
prototype of the compulsive hero, was compelled throughout his life to
seek out and conquer danger as a grotesque way of proving there was
no danger. Hemingway's mother reports that one of his first sentences
was, "'fraid of nothin'." 13 In an ironic way he was afraid of nothing
precisely because he, like all of us, was afraid of nothingness. The
Hemingway hero thus represents a runaway of the emergent, individ-
ualistic solution to the human situation. This hero is not choosing; his
actions are driven and fixed; he does not learn from new experiences.
Even the approach of death does not turn his gaze within or increase
his wisdom. Tl\e Hemingway code contains no place for aging and di-
minishment, for they have the odor of ordinariness. In The Old Man and
the Sea, Santiago meets his approaching death in a stereotyped way-
the same way he faced every one of life's basic threats:-by going out
alone to search for the great fish. 14
   Hemingway himself could not survive the dissolution of the myth of
his personal invulnerability. As his health and physical prowess de-
clined, as his "ordinariness" (in the sense that he like everyone must
face the human situation) became painfully evident, he grew bereft
and finally deeply depressed. His final illness, a paranoid psychosis
with persecutory delusions and ideas of reference, temporarily bol-
stered his myth of specialness. (All persecutory trends and ideas of ref-
erence flow from a core of personal grandiosity; after all, only a very
special person would warrant that much attention, albeit malevolent
attention, from his environment.) Eventually the paranoid solution
failed; and, left with no defense against the fear of death, Hemingway
committed suicide. Though it seems paradoxical that one would com-
mit suicide because of a fear of death, it is not uncommon. Many indi-
viduals have said in effect that "I so fear death I am driven to suicide."
The idea of suicide offers some surcease from terror. It is an active act;
it permits one to control that which controls one. Furthermore, as
Charles Wahl has noted, many suicides have a magical view of death
and regard it as temporary and reversible. 15 The individual who com-
mits suicide to express hostility or to generate guilt in others may be-
lieve in the continued existence of consciousness, so that it will be pos-
sible to savor the harvest of his or her death.
122


4 I Death and Psychopathology
THE WORKAHOLIC
   The compulsive heroic individualist represents a clear, but not clini-
cally common, example of the defense of specialness which is stretched
too thin and fails to protect the individual from anxiety or degenerates
into a runaway pattern. A commonplace example is the "workaholic"-
the individual consumed by work. One of the most striking features of
a workaholic is the implicit belief that he or she is "getting ahead,"
"progressing," moving up. Time is an enemy not only because it is
cousin to finitude but because it threatens one of the supports of the
delusion of specialness: the belief that one is eternally advancing. The
workaholic must deafen himself or herself to time's message: that the
past grows fatter at the expense of a shrinking future.
   The workaholic life mode is compulsive and dysfunctional: the
workaholic works or applies himself not because he wishes to but be-
cause he has to. The workaholic may push himself without mercy and
without regard for human limits. Leisure time is a time of anxiety and
is often frantically filled with some activity that conveys an illusion of
accomplishment. Living, thus, becomes equated with "becoming" or
"doing"; time not spent in "becoming" is not "living" but waiting for
life to commence.
   Culture, of course, plays an important role in the shaping of the indi-
vidual's values. Regarding "activity," Florence Kluckholm suggests an
anthropological classification of value orientations that postulates
three categories: "being,'' 'being-in-becoming," and "doing." 16 The
"being" orientation emphasizes the activity rather than the goal. It fo-
cuses on the spontaneous natural expression of the "is-ness" of the per-
sonality. "Being-in-becoming" shares with the "being" orientation an
emphasis on what a person is rather than on what the person can ac-
complish, but emphasizes the concept of "development." Thus, it en-
courages activity of a certain type-activity directed toward the goal of
the development of all aspects of the self. The "doing" orientation em-
phasizes accomplishments measurable by standards outside of the act-
ing individual. Obviously contemporary conservative American cul-
ture, with its emphasis on "what does the individual do?" and "getting
things done," is an extreme "doing" culture.
   Still, in every culture there are wide ranges of individual variation.
Something within the workaholic individual interacts with the cultur-
al standard in a manner that breeds a hypertrophied and rigid internal-
ization of the value system. It becomes difficult for individuals to as-
sume a bird's-eye view of their culture and to view their value system
as one among many possible stances. I had one workaholic patient who
                                                                       123


                                                                  I I DEATH
 treated himself to a rare noonday walk (as a reward for some particular-
ly important accomplishment) and was staggered by the sight of hun-
dreds of people standing around simply sunning themselves. "What do
they do all day? How can people live that way?" he wondered. A fran-
tic fight with time may be indicative of a powerful death fear. Worka-
holic individuals relate to time precisely as if they were under the seal
of imminent death and were scurrying to get as much completed as
possible.
   Embedded in our culture, we accept unquestioningly the goodness
and rightness of getting ahead. Not too long ago I was taking a brief
vacation alone at a Caribbean beach resort. One evening I was reading,
and from time to time I glanced up to watch the bar boy who was doing
nothing save languidly staring out to sea-much like a lizard sunning
itself on a warm rock, I thought. The comparison I made between him
and me made me feel very smug, very cozy. He was simply doing noth-
ing-wasting time; I was, on the other hand, doing something useful,
reading, learning. I was, in short, getting ahead. All was well, until
some internal imp asked the terrible question: Getting ahead of what?
How? And (even worse) why? Those questions were, and are still,
deeply disquieting. What was brought home to me with unusual force
was how I lull myself into a death-defeating delusion by continually
projecting myself forward into the future. I do not exist as a lizard ex-
ists; I prepare, I become, I am in transit. John Maynard Keynes puts it
this way: "What the 'purposeful' man is always trying to secure is a
spurious and illusive immortality, immortality for his acts by pushing
his interest in them forward in time. He does not love his cat, but his
eat's kittens; nor, in truth the kittens, but only the kittens' kittens, and
so on forward forever to the end of catdom.m7
   Tolstoy, in Anna Karenina, describes the collapse of the "upward spi-
ral" belief system in the person of Alexey Alexandrovitch, Anna's hus-
band, a man for whom everything has always ascended, a splendid ca-
reer, a brilliant marriage. Anna's leaving him signifies far more than
the loss of her: it is the collapse of a personal Weltanschauung.
        He felt that he was standing face to face with something illogical and ir-
        rational, and did not know what was to be done. Alexey Alexandrovitch
        was standing face to face with life, with the possibility of his wife's lov-
        ing some one other than himself, and this seemed to him very irrational
        and incomprehensible because it was life itself. All his life Alexey Alex-
        androvitch had lived and worked in official spheres, having to do with
        the reflection of life. And every time he had stumbled against life itself
        he had shrunk away from it. Now he experienced a feeling akin to that
        of a man who, while calmly crossing a precipice by a bridge, should sud-
124


4 I Death and Psychopathology
       denly discover that the bridge is broken, and that there is a chasm be-
       low. That chasm was life itself, the bridge that artificial life in which
       Alexey Alexandrovitch had lived. 18
    "The chasm was life itself, the bridge that artificial life ... " No one
 has said it more clearly. The defense, if successful, shields the individu-
al from the knowledge of the chasm. The broken bridge, the failed de-
fense, exposes one to a truth and a dread that an individual in midlife
following decades of self-deception is ill equipped to confront.
NARCISSISM
   The person who copes with basic anxiety with a prepotent belief in
his or her specialness will often encounter major difficulties in inter-
personal relationships. If a belief in personal inviolability is coupled,
as it often is, with a corresponding diminished recognition of the
rights and the specialness of the other, then one has a fully developed
narcissistic personality. Fromm is supposed to have described thenar-
cissistic personality by reporting a conversation between such an indi-
vidual and a physician. The patient requested an appointment that day.
The physician said that it would not be possible since his schedule was
filled. The patient exclaimed, "But, doctor, I just live a few minutes
from your office."
   The narcissistic personality pattern is more blatantly apparent in the
group therapy format than in individual therapy. In individual therapy
the patient's every word is listened to; each dream, fantasy, and feeling
is examined. Everything is given to the patient; little reciprocation is
asked; and months may go by before narcissistic features are evident.
In the therapy group, however, the patient is required to share time, to
understand and empathize with others, to form relationships and be
concerned about the feelings of others.
   The narcissistic pattern manifests itself in many ways: some patients
feel they may offend others but are entitled to be exempt from personal
criticism; they naturally feel that anyone with whom they fall in love
will reciprocate in kind; they feel they should not have to wait for oth-
ers; they expect gifts, surprises, and concern though they give none;
they expect to be loved and admired for simply being there. In the
therapy group they feel they should receive maximum group attention,
and that it should be forthcoming without any effort expended on
their part; they expect the group to reach out to them though they
themselves reach out to no one. The therapist must point out to such
patients over and over again that there is only one time in life when
                                                                            125


                                                           I I DEATH
this expectation is appropriate-when one is an infant and can demand
unconditional love from mother without any question of reciprocation.
   Hal, a patient in a therapy group, illustrates many of these points. He
was a bright, exceedingly articulate physicist who entertained the
group for months with spellbinding Faulknerian tales of his childhood
in the South (consuming in the process about 40 percent of the time of
an eight-person group). He was also sharp-tongued, but his sarcasm
was so clever and colorful that the group members took no offense and
allowed themselves to be entertained by him. Only gradually did the
other members grow to resent his attention-seeking greed, and hostil-
ity. They began to grow impatient with his tales, then to shift the focus
off of Hal and onto other members, and, finally, to label him explicitly
as a time and attention hog. Hal's anger intensified; it outgrew its cas-
ing of well-tempered sarcasm and erupted in a chronic continuous
stream of bitterness. His personal and professional life began to dete-
riorate: his wife threatened to leave him, and his department chairman
admonished him for relating poorly to his students. The group urged
him to examine his anger. Repeatedly the group members asked him,
"What are you angry about?" When he discussed some concrete event,
they asked him to go down to a deeper level and to answer once again,
"What are you angry about?" At the deepest level Hal said, "I'm angry
because I'm better than everyone here, and nobody recognizes me for
it. I'm smarter, I'm quicker, I'm better and, goddammit, nobody appre-
ciates me. I should be rich-Arabian rich-I should be recognized as a
Renaissance man, but I'm treated just like everybody else."
   The group was useful to Hal in a number of ways. Simply helping
him to excavate and air these feelings and to consider them rationally
was an essential and enormously beneficial first step. Slowly the other
members helped Hal to recognize that they, too, were sentient beings;
that they, too, felt special; that they, too, wanted succor, attention, and
center stage. Others, Hal learned, were not simply wellsprings of ap-
preciation and astonishment from which he could endlessly draw sup-
port for his own solipsism. "Empathy" was a key concept for Hal, and
the group helped him experience his empathy by, on occasion, asking
him to go around the group and guess what each of the other members
were feeling. At first Hal characteristically answered by guessing what
each was feeling about him; but gradually he was able to sense what
they were experiencing-for example, that they, too, wanted time or
were angry, disillusioned, or pained.
   Narcissism is so integral that often a patient has difficulty finding a
"ledge" outside his "specialness" on which to stand and observe him-
126


4 I Death and Psychopathology
self. Another patient who resembled Hal in many ways had his ego-
centricity brought home to him in a curious fashion. He had been in a
therapy group for two years and made striking improvement especially
in his ability to love and to commit himself to another. I saw him in a
debriefing session six months after termination and asked him if he
could recall some particularly critical incident in his therapy. He sin-
gled out a session in which the group viewed a videotape of the pre-
vious meeting; he had been stunned at the discovery that he remem-
bered only those parts of the meeting that focused on him; there were
vast stretches of the session that he saw as though for the first time.
Others had criticized him frequently for his self-centeredness, but it
was only brought home to him (as are all important truths) when he
discovered it for himself.
AGGRESSION AND CONTROL
   Specialness as a primary mode of death transcendence takes anum-
ber of other maladaptive forms. The drive for power is not uncommon-
ly motivated by this dynamic. One's own fear and sense of limitation is
avoided by enlarging oneself and one's sphere of control. There is
some evidence, for example, that those who enter the death-related
professions (soldiers, doctors, priests, and morticians) may in part be
motivated by a need to obtain control over death anxiety. For example,
Herman Feifel has shown that, though physicians have less conscious
death concern than contrast groups of patients or of the general popu-
lation, they have, at deeper levels, a greater fear of death. 19 In other
words, conscious death fears are allayed by the assumption of power,
but deeper fears, which in part dictated the choice of profession, oper-
ate still. When the dread is particularly strong, the aggressive drive is
not contained by peaceful sublimation, and it accelerates. Arrogance
and aggression are not uncommonly derived from this source. Rank
writes that "the death fear of the ego is lessened by the killing, the sac-
rifice, of the other; through the death of the other, one buys oneself
free from the penalty of dying." 20 Obviously Rank refers to more than
literal killing: more subtle forms of aggression-including domination,
exploitation, or "soul murder," as Ibsen put it 21 -serve the same pur-
pose. But this mode of adaptation often decompensates into a runaway
defense. Absolute power, as we have always known, corrupts absolute-
ly; it corrupts because it does not do the trick for the individual. Reality
always creeps in-the reality of our helplessness and our mortality; the
reality that, despite our reach for the stars, a creaturely fate awaits us.
                                                                        127


                                                              !/DEATH
THE DEFENSE OF SPECIALNESS: FALTERING AND ANXIETY
   In discussing the specialness mode of coping with death fear, I have
focused on maladaptive forms of the individualistic or agentic solution:
a runaway heroic individualism (with its attendant dread of any sign of
human frailty), a compulsive workaholic solution, a depression ensu-
ing from an interruption of the eternal spiral upward, a severe narcis-
sistic character disorder with its accompanying problematic interper-
sonal ramifications and maladaptive aggressive and controlling life
styles. But there is another even more serious and intrinsic limitation
to the defense of specialness. Many keen observers have noted that
though great exhilaration may for some time accompany individualist
expression and achievement, there comes a point where anxiety sets in.
The person who "emerges from embeddedness" or "stands out from
nature" must pay a price for his success. There is something frighten-
ing about individuation, about separating oneself from the whole,
about going forward and living life as a separate isolated being, about
surpassing one's peers and one's parents.
   Many clinicians have written on the "success neurosis"- a curious
condition where individuals on the point of the crowning success for
which they have long striven, develop not euphoria but a crippling
dysphoria which often ensures that they do not succeed. Freud refers
to the phenomenon as the "wrecked by success" syndrome. 22 Rank de-
scribes it as "life anxiety" 23 -the fear of facing life as a separate being.
Maslow notes that we shrink away from our highest possibilities (as
well as from our lowest), and terms the phenomenon the "Jonah com-
plex," since Jonah like all of us could not bear his personal greatness
and sought to avoid his destiny. 24
   How is one to explain this curious, self-negating human tendency?
Perhaps it is a result of an entanglement of achievement and aggres-
sion. Some people use achievement as a method of vindictively sur-
passing others; they fear that others will become aware of their motives
and retaliate when success becomes too great. Freud thought it had
much to do with the fear of surpassing one's father and thereby expos-
ing oneself t0 the threat of castration. Becker advances our understand-
ing when he suggests that the terrible thing in surpassing one's father·
is not castration but the frightening prospect of becoming one's own
father. 25 To become one's own father means to relinquish the comfort-
ing but magical parental buttress against the pain inherent in one's
awareness of personal finiteness.
   Thus the individual who plunges into life is doomed to anxiety.
Standing out from nature, being one's own father or, as Spinoza put it,
128


4 I Death and Psychopathology
"one's own god," means utter isolation; it means standing alone with-
out the myth of rescuer or deliverer and without the comfort of the hu-
man huddle. Such unshielded exposure to the isolation of individu-
ation is too terrible for most of us to bear. When our belief in personal
specialness and inviolability fails to provide the surcease from pain we
require, we seek relief from the other major alternative denial system:
the belief in a personal ultimate rescuer.
                          The Ultimate Rescuer
Ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny. In both the physical and the social
development of the individual, the development of the species is mir-
rored. In no social attribute is this fact more clearly evident than in the
human belief in the existence of a personal omnipotent intercessor: a
force or being that eternally observes, loves, and protects us. Though it
may allow us to venture close to the edge of the abyss, it will ultimately
rescue us. Fromm characterizes this mythic figure as the "magic help-
er,"26 and Masserman as the "omnipotent servant." 27 In chapter three I
traced the development of this belief system in early childhood: like
the belief in personal specialness, it is rooted in events of early life
when parents seemed eternally concerned and satisfied one's every
need. Certainly humankind from the beginnings of written history has
clung to the belief in a personal god-a figure that might be eternally
loving, frightening, fickle, harsh, propitiated, or angered, but a figure
that was always there. No early culture has ever believed that humans
were alone in an indifferent world.
   Some individuals discover their rescuer not in a supernatural being
but in their earthly surroundings, either in a leader or in some higher
cause. Human beings, for milleniums, have conquered their fear of
death in this manner and have chosen to lay down their freedom, in-
deed their lives, for the embrace of some higher figure or personified
cause. Tolstoy was keenly aware of our need to manufacture a godlike
figure and then to bask in the illusion of safety emanating from our
creation. Consider in War and Peace, Rostov's battlefield ecstasy at the
thought of the Tsar's proximity:
       He was entirely absorbed in the feeling of happiness at the Tsar's being
       near. His nearness alone made up to him by itself, he felt, for the loss of
                                                                             129


                                                                    1/DEATH
       the whole day. He was happy, as a lover is happy when the moment of
       the longed-for meeting has come. Not daring to look around from the
       front line, by an ecstatic instinct without looking around, he felt his ap-
       proach. And he felt it not only from the sound of the tramping hoofs of
       the approaching cavalcade, he felt it because as the Tsar came nearer ev-
       erything grew brighter, more joyful and significant, and more festive.
       Nearer and nearer moved this sun, as he seemed to Rostov, shedding
       around him rays of mild and majestic light, and now he felt himself en-
       folded in that radiance, he heard his voice-that voice caressing, calm,
       majestic, and yet so simple .... And Rostov got up and went out to wan-
       der about among the campfires, dreaming of what happiness it would be
       to die-not saving the Emperor's life-(of that he did not dare to
       dream), but simply to die before the Emperor's eyes. He really was in
       love with the Tsar and the glory of the Russian arms and the hope of
       coming victory. And he was not the only man who felt thus in those
       memorable days that preceded the battle of Austerlitz: nine-tenths of the
       men in the Russian army were at that moment in love, though less ec-
       statically, with their Tsar and the glory of the Russian arms. 28
   "As the Tsar came nearer everything grew brighter, more joyful and
significant, and more festive. Nearer and nearer moved this sun ... "
How beautifully clear is Tolstoy's depiction of the internal defensive
ecstasy-not only, of course, of the Russian soldier but of the legions of
Everyman and Everywoman whom therapists see in everyday clinical
work.
THE RESCUER DEFENSE AND PERSONALITY RESTRICTION
   Overall the ultimate rescuer defense is less effective than the belief
in personal specialness. Not only is it more likely to break down but it
is intrinsically restrictive to the person. Later I shall report on empiri-
cal research that demonstrates this ineffectiveness, but it is an insight
that Kierkegaard arrived at intuitively over one hundred years ago. He
has a curious statement contrasting the perils of "venturing" (emer-
gence, individuation, specialness) and not venturing (fusion, embed-
dedness, belief in ultimate rescuer):
        ... it is dangerous to venture. And why? Because one may lose. Not to
       venture is shrewd. And yet, by not venturing, it is so dreadfully easy to
       lose that which it would be difficult to lose in even the most venture-
       some venture, ... one's self. For if I have ventured amiss-very well,
       then life helps me by its punishment. But if I have not ventured at all-
       who then helps me? And, moreover, if by not venturing at all in the
        highest sense (and to venture in the highest sense is precisely to become con-
       scious of oneself) I have gained all earthly advantages ... and lose myself.
       What of that? 29
130


4 I Death and Psychopathology
To remain embedded in another, "not to venture," subjects one then to
the greatest peril of all-the loss of oneself, the failure to have ex-
plored or developed the manifold potentials within oneself.
   When too much is asked of the rescuer defense, a highly restricted
life mode results, as in the case of Lena, a thirty-year-old member of a
therapy group. Lena was deeply depressed, flooded with suicidal ide-
ation, and often lapsed into depressive stupors during which she
stayed in bed for days on end. She lived an isolated existence, spending
most of her time alone in her sparsely furnished room. Her personal
appearance was striking: in every aspect-from her long careless
blonde hair to her decorated jeans and combat fatigue jacket, to her
youthful posturing and gullibility-she resembled a girl in midadoles-
cence. She had lost her mother at age five and her father at twelve and
had grown exceedingly attached to her grandparents and other parent
surrogates. As her grandparents grew old and infirm, she developed a
horror of the telephone-the phone had been the messenger of her fa-
ther's death-and she refused to answer it lest it bring news of her
grandparents' death.
   Lena was overtly terrified of death and avoided any contact with
death motifs, and she attempted to deal with her terror in a most inef-
fective and magical mode-a mode that I have seen many patients use:
she attempted to elude death by refusing to live. Like Oskar in Gunter
Grass's The Tin Drum, she attempted to conquer time, to fix it perma-
nently by remaining a child forever. She devoted herself to avoiding
individuation and sought safety by attempting to submerge herself in a
protector. An axiom of group therapy is that the members display, in
the here and now of the group, their internal defenses as they interact
with one another. Lena's defensive posture became exceedingly trans-
parent as the group proceeded. Once she began a session by announc-
ing that she had, the previous weekend, been involved in a serious
automobile accident. She had gone to visit a friend in a city 150 miles
away and through gross negligence had run off the road, overturned
her car, and narrowly escaped death. Lena commented that it would
have been so easy and desirable not to have regained consciousness.
   The group members responded accordingly. They felt concerned and
frightened for Lena. They outdid one another in offering her nurtur-
ance. The group therapist responded in the same fashion until he be-
gan to analyze, silently, the process of the meeting. Lena was always
dying, always frightening the group, always mobilizing massive con-
cern from the other members. In fact, during her first months in the
group the members assumed the task of keeping Lena alive, keeping
                                                                     131


                                                          I I DEATH
her eating, keeping her from suicide. The therapist wondered, "Does
anything good ever happen to Lena?"
   Lena's accident had occurred on the way to visit a friend. Suddenly
the therapist asked himself the question, "What friend?" Lena had re-
lentlessly presented herself to the group as an isolated individual sans
friends, relatives, even acquaintances. And yet she described driving
150 miles to see a friend. When the therapist asked the question, he
learned that, yes, Lena had a boyfriend; that, yes, she had spent every
weekend with him for months; and that, yes, he wished to marry her.
Yet she had chosen not to share this information with the group. Her
reasons were obvious: what was important to Lena was not growth but
survival, and survival seemed possible only by soliciting care and pro-
tection from the group and the therapist. Her major dilemma was how
to retain protection in perpetuity: she must give no evidence of growth
or change lest the group members and the therapist conclude she was
well enough to terminate therapy.
   During the course of the group therapy Lena was highly threatened
by incidents that challenged her major defensive system: that is, the
belief that help was "out there," and that only the continued presence
of the deliverer ensured her safety. Lena's passion for fusion with the
therapist resulted in many transference distortions that required con-
tinuous attention throughout therapy. She was exquisitely sensitive to
any sign of rejection by him and reacted strongly to evidences of his
mortality, fallibility, or unavailability. She, more than the other mem-
bers, was alarmed (and angry) when he took vacations, or became ill, or
was obviously mistaken or confused in the group. Much of the thera-
peutic work with patients who have a hypertrophied craving for an ul-
timate rescuer will, as I demonstrate in the next chapter, center about
the analysis of transference.
THE COLLAPSE OF THE RESCUER
Through much of life the belief in an ultimate rescuer provides consid-
erable solace and functions smoothly and invisibly. Most individuals
remain unaware of the structure of their belief system until it fails to
serve its purpose; or untiL as Heidegger put it, there is a "breakdown
in the machinery." 80 There are many possibilities for breakdown and
many forms of pathology associated with the collapse of the defense.
   Fatal Illnesses. Perhaps the severest test for the effectiveness of the
ultimate rescuer delusion is presented by fatal illness. Many individ-
uals, so stricken, channel a great deal of energy into bolstering their
belief in the presence and power of a protector. As the obvious candi-
132


4 I Death and Psychopathology
date for the role of rescuer is the physician, the patient-doctor relation-
ship becomes charged and complex. In part, the robe of rescuer is
thrust upon the physician by the patient's wish to believe; in part,
however, the physician dons the robe gladly because playing God is
the physician's method of augmenting his belief in his personal spe-
cialness. Either way, the result is the same: the doctor becomes larger
than life, and the patient's attitude to him or her is often irrationally
obeisant. Commonly, patients with a fatal illness dread angering or dis-
appointing their physicians; these patients apologize for taking a phy-
sician's time and are so flustered in a physician's presence that they
forget to ask the pressing questions they have prepared. (Some patients
attempt to cope with this problem by preparing a written checklist of
questions to ask the physician.)
   To patients it is so important that doctors retain their power that a
patient will neither challenge nor doubt one. Many patients, in fact, in
a highly magical way, permit physicians to maintain the role of the
successful healer by concealing important information from them
about their (the patients') psychological and even physical distress.
Often, thus, the physician is the last to know about the depth of a pa-
tient's despair. A patient who is perfectly able to talk openly to nurses
or social workers about his anguish, maintains a cheery, plucky face
toward the physician, who concludes that the patient is handling the
situation as well as could be expected. (Consequently physicians are
notoriously reluctant to refer terminally ill patients for psychological
treatment.)
   Individuals differ in the tenacity with which they cling to denial,
but eventually all denial crumbles in the face of overwhelming reality.
Kiibler-Ross, for example, reports that in her long experience she has
seen only a handful of individuals maintain denial to the moment of
death. A patient's reaction to learning that no medical or surgical cure
exists is catastrophic. He or she feels angry, deceived, and betrayed. At
whom, however, can one be angry? At the cosmos? At fate? Many pa-
tients are angry at the doctor for failing them-not for failing medical-
ly but for failing to incarnate the patient's personal myth of an ultimate
deliverer.
   Depression. In his study of psychotically depressed individuals, Sil-
vano Arieti describes a central motif, a life ideology that precedes and
"prepares the ground" for depression. 31 His patients lived a type of me-
diated existence; they lived not for themselves but for either the
"dominant other" or the "dominant goal." Though the terminology
differs, Arieti's description of these two ideologies coincides closely
                                                                        133


                                                                    1/DEATH
with the two defenses against the fear of death I have described. The
individual who lives for the "dominant goal" is the individual who
fashions his or her life around a belief in personal specialness and in-
violability. As I discussed earlier, depression often ensues when the be-
lief in an ever-ascending spiral ("dominant goal") collapses .
  . To live for the "dominant other" is to attempt to merge with another
whom one perceives as the dispenser of protection and meaning in life.
The dominant other may be one's spouse, mother, father, lover, thera-
pist, or an anthropomorphization of a business or a social institution.
The ideology may collapse for many reasons: the dominant other may
die, leave, withdraw love and attention, or prove too ·fallible for the
task.
    When patients recognize the failure of their ideology, they are often
overwhelmed; they may feel that they have sacrificed their lives for a
currency that has proven counterfeit. Yet they have available no alter-
native strategy for coping. Discussing a patient, Arieti puts it:
        The patient has reached a critical point at which a realignment of psy-
        chodynamic forces and a new pattern of interpersonal relationships are
        due, but she is not able to muster them. This is her predicament. She is
        helpless. She either cannot visualize alternative cognitive structures that
        lead to recuperative steps or, if she is able to visualize them, they appear
        unsurmountable. At other times these alternatives do not seem unreali-
        zable, but worthless, since she has learned to invest all her interest and
        desires only in the relationship that failed. 32
    The patient may attempt to re-establish the relationship or to search
for another. If these attempts fail, the patient is without resources and
feels both depleted and self-condemnatory. Restructuring a life ideolo-
gy is beyond comprehension; and many patients, rather than question
 their basic belief system, conclude that they are too worthless or too
bad to warrant the love and protection of the ultimate rescuer. Their
depression is abetted, furthermore, by the fact that, unconsciously, suf-
fering and self-immolation function as a last desperate plea for love.
Thus, they are bereft because they have lost love, and they remain ber-
eft in order to regain it.
    Masochism. I have described a cluster of behaviors associated with
the hypertrophied belief in the ultimate rescuer: self-effacement, fear
of withdrawal of love, passivity, dependency, self-immolation, refusal
to accept adulthood, and depression at collapse of the belief system.
When accented, each of these may produce a characteristic clinical syn-
drome. When self-immolation dominates, the patient is referred to as
"masochistic."
134


4 I Death and Psychopathology
   Karen, a forty-year-old patient I treated for two years, taught me a
great deal about the dynamics behind the urge to inflict pain on one-
self. Karen entered therapy for a number of reasons: masochistic sexual
propensities, an inability to achieve sexual pleasure with her "straight"
boyfriend, depression, a pervasive inertia, and terrifying nightmares
and hypnagogic experiences. In therapy she rapidly developed a pow-
erful positive transference. She devoted herself to the project of elicit-
ing care and concern from me. Her masturbatory fantasies consisted of
her becoming very ill (either with a physical disease like tuberculosis,
or a psychotic breakdown) and my feeding and cradling her. She de-
layed leaving my office so as to spend a few extra minutes with me; so
as to have my signature, she saved her canceled checks with which she
had paid my bills; she attempted to visit my lectures so as to catch sight
of me. Nothing seemed to please her more than for me to be stern with
her; in fact, if I expressed any irritation, she experienced sexual excita-
tion in my office. In every way she made me bigger than life and selec-
tively ignored all of my obvious flaws. She read a book I had written
with a patient in which I had been highly self-revelatory about my
own anxieties and limitations. 33 But rather than to appreciate my limita-
tions, her response was to admire me even more for the great courage I
had shown in publishing such a book.
   She responded similarly to signs of weakness or limitation in other
important and powerful figures in her life. If her boyfriend became ill
or evinced any sign of weakness, confusion, or indecision, she exper-
ienced much anxiety. She could not bear to see him falter. Once when
he was severely injured in an auto accident, she became phobic about
visiting his hospital room. She responded similarly to her parents and
was sorely threatened by their increasing age and frailty. As a child,
she had related to them through illness. "Being sick was the lie of my
life," said Karen. She sought pain to get succor. On more than one oc-
casion during her childhood, she spent weeks in bed with a fictitious
disease. During adolescence she became anorexic, only too glad to ex-
change physical starvation for the attention and solicitude it incited.
   Her sexuality joined in the pursuit for safety and deliverance: force,
restraint, strength, and pain aroused her, while weakness, passivity,
even tenderness repulsed her. To be punished was to be protected; to
be bound, confined, or restricted was wonderful: it meant that limits
were being set, and that some powerful figure was setting them. Her
masochism was overdetermined: she sought survival not only through
subjugation but also through the symbolic and magical value of suffer-
ing. A small death, after all, is better than the real thing.
                                                                       135


                                                         1/DEATH
  Treatment was successful in alleviating the acute depression, the
nightmares, the suicidal preoccupation; but there came a time when
treatment with me seemed to impede further growth, since, to avoid
losing me, Karen continued to immolate herself. I, therefore, set a ter-
mination date six months in the future and told her that after that time
I would not see her again in treatment. Over the next few weeks we
weathered the storm of a severe recrudescence of all symptomatology.
Not only did her severe anxiety and nightmares return, but she had
terrifying hallucinatory experiences consisting of gigantic swooping
bats attacking her whenever she was alone.
  This was a period of great fear and despair for Karen. Her delusion of
the ultimate rescuer had always protected her against the terror of
death and its removal left her overly exposed to dread. Wonderful po-
ems she wrote in her journal (mailed to me after termination of ther-
apy) describe her terror graphically.
      With death in my mouth I speak to you
      And maggots eating at my heart.
      In the cacophony of bells
      My protests go unheard.
      Death is disappointment,
      A bitter bread.
      You cram it down my throat
      To stifle my screams.
  Karen's deeply entrenched and powerful belief that, by merging
with me, she could escape death was overtly expressed in this poem:
      I would take Death as my master,
      Call his whip a gentle hand,
      And ride with him to those fell caves
      Wherein he dwells;
      Willingly forsake the ripe smell of summer
      Seed pods bursting with ebullient life,
      To sit with him on thrones of ice,
      And know his love.
   As the termination date approached, Karen pulled out all stops. She
threatened suicide if I would not continue treating her. Another poem
expressed her mood and her threat:
       Death is no pretense.
       It is as stark a reality,
       as complete a presence as life itself,
       the other ultimate choice.
136


4 I Death and Psychopathology
      I feel myself running into shadows,
      clothing myself in cobwebs,
      hiding from the reality you thrust at me.
      I want to hold up my dark cloak, death,
      and threaten you with it.
      Do you understand?
      I will wrap myself in this if you persist.
   Though I felt frightened by Karen's threats and provided her as
much support as possible, I decided not to budge from my stand and
maintained that at the end of the six months I would not continue to
see her regardless of how ill she was. Our termination was to be final
and irrevocable; no degree of distress on her part could influence it.
Gradually her efforts to merge with me subsided, and she turned
toward the task at hand: how to use our final sessions as constructively
as possible. It was only then, when she had relinquished all hope of my
continued, eternal presence, that she could work truly effectively in
therapy. She allowed herself to know and to make known her
strengths and her growth. She rapidly obtained a full-time position
commensurate with her talents and skills (she had procrastinated find-
ing this work for four years!). She changed her demeanor and groom-
ing radically from woebegone waif to mature attractive woman.
  Two years after termination she asked to see me again because of the
death of a friend. I agreed to meet with her for a single session and
learned that not only had she maintained her changes but had under-
gone considerably more growth. It seems that one important thing for
patients to learn is that, though therapists can be helpful, there is a
point beyond which they can offer nothing more. In therapy, as in life,
there is an inescapable substrate of lonely work and lonely existence.
   The Rescuer Defense and Interpersonal Difficulties. The fact that some
individuals avoid the fear of death through a belief in the existence of
an ultimate rescuer offers the clinician a useful frame of reference for
some baffling, interpersonal minuets. Consider the following examples
of a common clinical problem: the patient who is enmeshed in a pa-
tently ungratifying, even destructive relationship and yet is unable to
wrench free.
  Bonnie was forty-eight years old, had a severe circulatory disorder
(Buerger's disease), and, after a twenty-year childless marriage, had
been separated for ten years. Her husband, a fervent outdoorsman, ap-
peared to be a highly insensitive, self-centered autocrat who finally left
Bonnie when her poor health made it impossible for her to accompany
                                                                       137


                                                          1/DEATH
him on hunting and fishing expeditions. He provided her no finan-
cial support during the ten years of separation, had affairs with numer-
ous women (descriptions of which he did not fail to share with her),
and visited Bonnie's home once every week or two to use the wash-
ing machine, to pick up recorded phone messages for the business
phone he maintained there, and, once or twice a year, to have sexual
relations with her. Bonnie, because of strong moral standards, refused
to date other men while she was still married. She continued to be ob-
sessed with her husband-at times enraged at the sight of him, at times
enamored of him. Her life diminished, as she became ill, lonely, and
tormented by his weekly washing machine visits. Yet she could nei-
ther divorce him, disconnect his phone, or terminate his laundry
privileges.
   Delores had a long series of unsatisfying relationships with men and
finally, at the age of thirty-five, married an extraordinarily compulsive,
unpsychologically minded individual. Before her marriage she had
been in therapy because of chronic anxiety and duodenal ulcer. After
marriage her husband's controlling punctiliousness soon made her
prenuptial anxiety state blissful in comparison. He kept time sheets for
Delores's weekend schedule (9:00-10:15 gardening, 10:30-noon, gro-
cery shopping, etc.) and a careful chart of her expenditures; he moni-
tored all phone calls and rebuked her for spending time with anyone
but him. Soon Delores was raw with anxiety and suppressed rage; yet
she was terror-stricken at the very thought of separation or divorce.
   Martha was thirty-one years old and desperate to marry and raise a
family. For several years she had been involved with a man who be-
longed to a mystical religious sect that taught him that the fewer com-
mitments an individual makes, the greater is his freedom. Consequent-
ly, though he enjoyed Martha, he refused to live with her or make any
long-term commitment to her. He was alarmed by her need for him;
and, the tighter she clutched, the less was he willing to promise. Mar-
tha was obsessed with binding him and was pained beyond description
at his lack of commitment. Yet she felt addicted and was unable to
wrench herself free; each time she broke with him, she suffered a pain-
ful state of withdrawal and finally in depression or panic reached for
the telephone to call him. He, during times of separation, was madden-
ingly tranquil; he cared for her but could manage well without her.
Martha was too consumed with him to search effectively for other rela-
tionships: her major project in life was to extract a commitment from
him-a commitment that reason and experience strongly suggested
was not to be forthcoming.
138


4 I Death and Psychopathology
   Each of these three patients was involved in a relationship that was
responsible for considerable anguish; each realized that continuing in
the relationship was self-destructive. Each tried, in vain, to wrench
herself free; in fact these futile attempts constituted the major theme of
the therapy of each woman. What made disengagement so difficult?
What welded each of them so tightly to another person? An obvious
and a common thread runs through the concerns of the three
patients, and it quickly became apparent when I asked each one to
tell me what came to mind when she thought of separating from her
mate.
   Bonnie had a twenty-year marriage to a husband who had made ev-
ery decision for her. He was a man who could do everything and "took
care" of her. Of course, as she was to learn when she separated, "being
taken care of" restricted her growth and self-sufficiency. But it was so
comforting to know that someone was always there to protect and res-
cue her. Bonnie had a serious illness and doggedly continued to be-
lieve, even after ten years' separation, that her husband was "out
there" taking care of her. Every time I urged her to reflect on life with-
out his presence (and I speak here of symbolic presence; aside from the
shared washing machine and a few mechanical coital acts, there had
been no meaningful physical presence for years), she became very anx-
ious. What would she do in an emergency? Whom would she call? Life
would be unbearably lonely without him. Obviously he was a symbol
that shielded her from confronting the harsh reality that there is no
one "out there," that the "emergency" is inevitable and no person,
symbolic or real, can obviate it.
   Delores, like Bonnie, was terrified of being alone. Though her hus-
band was unspeakably restrictive, she preferred the prison of her mar-
riage to, as she put it, the freedom of the streets. She would be nothing,
she said, but an outcast, a soldier in the army of misfit women search-
ing for the occasional stray single man. Merely asking her, in the ther-
apy hour, to reflect on a separation was sufficient to bring on a severe
bout of anxious hyperventilation.
   Martha permitted her life to be governed by the future. Whenever I
asked her to meditate on what it would be like to give up her relation-
ship with her uncommitted boyfriend, she always responded that all
she could think of was ''eating alone at sixty-three." When I asked her
for her definition of commitment, she replied, "It's the assurance I'll
never have to live alone or die alone." The thought of dining alone or
going to the movies alone filled her with shame and dread. What was it
                                                                       139


                                                           I I DEATH
that she really wanted from a relationship? "Being able to get help
without having to ask for it," she replied.
   Martha was tyrannized by the always present, desperate fear that she
would be alone in the future. Like many neurotic patients, she did not
really live in the present, but instead attempted to find the past (that is,
the comforting bond with mother) in the future. Martha's fear and her
need were so great that they ensured that she would not establish a
gratifying relationship with a man. She was too frightened of loneli-
ness to give up her current unsatisfying relationship, and her need was
so obviously frenzied that she frightened away prospective partners.
   For each of these women, then, the bonding force was not the rela-
tionship per se but the terror of being alone; and what was especially
fearful about being alone was the absence of that magical, powerful
other who hovers about each of us, observing, anticipating our needs,
providing each of us with a shield against the destiny of death.
   That the belief in the ultimate rescuer may result in restrictive inter-
personal relationships is illustrated exceptionally clearly in the rela-
tionship between some adults and aging parents. Irene was forty years
old and had long had an intensely ambivalent relationship with her
mother. The mother was hostile, demanding, and chronically de-
pressed, and toward her Irene felt, for the most part, loathing and great
rage. Yet when her mother complained about her living conditions,
Irene invited her to move across the country in order to live with her.
Though Irene was in therapy at the time, she did not discuss with the
therapist her invitation to her mother until after she had sent the invi-
tation. It would seem as though she was well aware of the self-destruc-
tive nature of her behavior but was compelled to barrel ahead and did
not wish anyone to dissuade her. Not long after her mother's arrival,
Irene decompensated: she had severe bouts of anxiety, intractable in-
somnia, and an acute flare-up of asthma. So long as we focused in ther-
apy on her mother's guilt-producing maneuvers, intrusiveness, and
venomous disposition, we made no progress. That was not to come un-
til we turned to another question-the question crucial to the under-
standing of many tortured relationships between adults and their par-
ents: Why was mother so important to Irene? Why was it her responsibility
and task to ensure mother's happiness? Why could she not separate
herself from her mother?
   When I asked Irene to reflect on the texture of her life without her
mother, her first association was interesting: "Without mother no one
would care about what I eat!" Mother was out there hovering some-
where over her right shoulder watching, taking note of Irene's eating.
140


4 I Death and Psychopathology
At a conscious level her mother's presence had always infuriated Irene,
but now as she looked deeper into it, it was reassuring. If mother moni-
tored what she ate, then it followed that mother would in other ways
ensure her daughter's well-being. Irene needed mother not only alive
but vigorous; signs of infirmity, apathy, or depression in her mother
were, at a deep level, distressing for Irene.
         Toward an Integrated View of Psychopathology
I have, for didactic purposes, focused separately on two major modes of
coping with death anxiety and presented vignettes of patients who
show extreme forms of one of these two basic defenses, but now it is
time to integrate them. Most patients do not, of course, present with
clear and monothematic clinical pictures. Generally one does not con-
struct a single ponderous defense but instead uses multiple, interlaced
defenses in an attempt to wall off anxiety. Most individuals defend
against death anxiety through both a delusional belief in their own in-
violability and a belief in the existence of an ultimate rescuer. Although
I have thus far presented these two defenses as a dialectic, they are
closely interdependent. Because we have an observing, omnipotent be-
ing or force continuously concerned with our welfare, we are unique
and immortal and have the courage to emerge from embeddedness. Be-
cause we are unique and special beings, special forces in the universe
are concerned with us. Though our ultimate rescuer is omnipotent, he
is at the same time, our eternal servant.
   Otto Rank in a thoughtful essay entitled ''Life Fear and Death Fear"
posited a basic dynamic that illuminates the relationship between the
two defenses. 114 Rank felt that there is in the individual a primal fear
that manifests itself sometimes as a fear of life, sometimes as a fear of
death. By "fear of life" Rank meant anxiety in the face of a "loss of con-
nection with a greater whole." The fear of life is the fear of having to
face life as an isolated being, it is the fear of individuation, of "going
forward," of "standing out from nature." Rank believed that the proto-
typical life fear was "birth," the original trauma and the original sepa-
ration. By "fear of death" Rank referred to the fear of extinction, of loss
of individuality, of being dissolved again into the whole.
   Rank stated that, "Between these two fear possibilities, these poles of
                                                                        141


                                                           I I DEATH
fear, the individual is thrown back and forth all his life ... "The indi-
vidual attempts to separate himself, to individuate, to affirm his auton-
omy, to go forward, to fulfill his potential. Yet there comes a time
when he develops fear in the face of life. Individuation, emergence, or,
as I put it in this chapter, affirmation of specialness, are not duty-free:
they entail a fearful, lonely sense of unprotectedness-a sense that the
individual assuages by reversing direction: one goes "backward," relin-
quishes individuation, finds comfort in fusing, in dissolving oneself, in
giving oneself up to another. Yet the comfort is unstable because this
alternative evokes fear also-the fear of death: relinquishment, stagna-
tion, and, finally, inorganicity. Between these two poles of fear, life fear
and death fear, the individual shuttles throughout life.
   Though the paradigm I offer here of the dual defenses of specialness
and the ultimate rescuer is not identical with Rank's life-fear, death-
fear dialectic, they obviously overlap. Rank's poles of fear correspond
closely to the inherent limits of the defenses I have described. "Life
anxiety" emerges from the defense of specialness: it is the price one
pays for standing out, unshielded, from nature. "Death anxiety" is the
toll of fusion: when one gives up autonomy, one loses oneself and suf-
fers a type of death. Thus one oscillates, one goes in one direction until
the anxiety outweighs the relief of the defense, and then one moves in
the other direction.
   This oscillation may be demonstrated in some of the clinical material
I have already presented. Consider Lena, who avoided anxiety by
choosing to be frozen in adolescence. She continuously sought to
merge herself with some rescuer. Yet she was often terrified by her sit-
uation: she clung to others but stubbornly rebelled against them. She
craved closeness; yet when it was offered, she fled. Much of her energy
seemed to be directed toward avoiding ''life anxiety" with its change
and growth. She sought peace, comfort, and safety; yet when she got
them, she was engulfed in death anxiety: she abhored sleep or any still-
ness and, to avoid either, engaged in frenzied activity-often, for ex-
ample, driving aimlessly all night.
   Then there was Karen who was masochistic and chose to immolate
herself, if necessary, to obtain my embrace. But she, too, was frightened
of her objective. Merging with another meant comfort and safety, but it
also meant the loss of herself. One of her poems clearly illustrates her
dilemma:
       I want to shake, like a dog out of water,
       to free myself from your influence.
       I was too free with you,
142


4 I Death and Psychopathology
      let you too near my heart
      and got stuck like flesh to icy metal.
      Warm to me, and let me go.
      To free myself, I must tear flesh,
      make wounds that will not heal.
       Is that what you want from me?
   Emergence-fusion oscillation is often displayed particularly clearly
in family therapy sessions where the major problem centers around a
teen-ager's preparing to leave home. In one such family I treated, Don,
the nineteen-year-old identified patient, was ostensibly fed up with his
parents' controlling his life. Among his spasmodic efforts to be his own
man was his insistence that his parents not participate in his choice of
college or in the college admission procedure. However, he procrasti-
nated too long to gain admission to the colleges of his choice and de-
cided to live at home and attend a local junior college.
   Don's continued presence at home resulted in a chaotic family envi-
ronment. He was wildly ambivalent about freedom. Though painfully
sensitive to any of his parents' actions that suggested limitation of his
freedom, he covertly but unmistakably asked for curtailment: he per-
sisted in playing the stereo at a deafening pitch till late in the night; he
demanded the use of the family car but gunned it, tires screeching out
of the driveway, and often returned it with a gas tank so empty that it
offered his father, at best, a slim chance of making it to a service station
the next morning. He demanded money for dating but "inadvertently"
left condoms on his dresser for his strict Mormon parents to find.
   Don insisted on freedom but would not take it. On numerous occa-
sions he angrily left home to seek harbor with a friend for a few days,
but he never seriously explored getting his own apartment. His parents
were wealthy, but he would not allow them to pay his apartment rent,
nor would he pay it himself. (He had sufficient funds from summer
work but refused to spend these, since he wished to save for a time
when he might "really" need the money!) Though Don yearned and
fought for freedom, he simultaneously said to his parents, ''I'm imma-
ture, irresponsible, take care of me, but pretend I didn't ask you."
   Don's parents were by no means disinterested bystanders in this dra-
ma. Don was the oldest child; his leaving home signified a milestone in
his parents' life cycle. Don's father, a fiercely competitive workaholic,
was especially threatened by this milestone: it uncovered the illusory
nature of his specialness project; it signified personal diminishment,
the beginning of a new, less vital, less useful stage of life; it signified
                                                                        143


                                                                        I I DEATH
displacement and decline and, lurking beyond both, death. Don's
mother, whose major identity was that of mother and housekeeper, was
similarly threatened by Don's departure. She feared loneliness and the
loss of meaning in her life. Consequently, Don's parents, in the subt-
lest of ways, impeded his growth; they prepared him for life as an
autonomous adult (is that not the goal of the successful parent?), yet
pleaded sotto voce, "do not grow up, do not leave us, stay young for-
ever, and so shall we." •
   Another individual oscillating between emergence and fusion was
Rob, a thirty-year-old successful business executive, who consulted me
because of his transvestism. He had cross-dressed, always in private,
since adolescence; and the pattern had, until the present, always been
ego-syntonic: that is, the urge seemed to come from the very center of
himself-cross-dressing provided much pleasure, and he wished to do
it. Recently, however, the behavior seemed to be taking over. He was
often anxious and was aware of having to cross-dress to relieve anxiety.
The symptom demanded more: it wanted him to appear in public as a
woman; it wanted him to shave all his body hair (which he did) and, fi-
nally, to cut off his penis and become a woman. Thus he was anxious
either way: anxious if he did not cross-dress, and anxious if he did.
   Ordinarily, psychotherapists understand the transvestite patient by
assuming that the sexual perversion is an attempt to ward off castration
anxiety. The symptom of cross-dressing serves two functions: it is a
symbolic castration (that is, if one is already castrated, one is safe from
attack) and at the same time permits the individual to have some form
of genital satisfaction. This paradigm had, for Rob, some explanatory
power. It clarified, for example, why he could masturbate only while
dressed in women's clothes and fantasizing himself as a woman. Yet it
left much unexplained, and an existential paradigm provided a broader
view of Rob's behavior.
   Rob's fantasies were rarely explicitly sexual. Generally he imagined
himself as a woman being greeted and admired by a group of women
who accepted him into their circle; they would accept him for his looks
or simply for his person but would require of him no specific act. He
wished to blend in with them, to be one of them, to be a practical
nurse, a housekeeper, or a typist. He commented that what was particu-
larly important was not having to perform: he was so weary of the
   •similar dynamics are generally found in the families of children with school phobia.
W. Tietz presents several cases of a patient's fear of death resulting in a school phobia: a
child attempts to defend himself or herself from death anxiety by refusing to separate
from the family; the family, because of ambivalence about the child's growing autonomy,
colludes in the sympton."
144


4 I Death and Psychopathology
stress inherent in being a man-of competing, standing out, strug-
gling, showing his skill.
   The cross-dressing hid much preoccupation with and fear of death.
Rob's mother had died slowly and painfully from cancer when he was
a teen-ager; and for over fourteen years he had continued to dream of
her. Cross-dressing was a symbol of merging with mother and with all
women; the transvestite act for most of his life had bound the anxiety
inherent in individuation. Always a high achiever, Rob had long ago
surpassed his father but, in so doing, had to face what Rank calls "life
fear." Rob had always responded to this anxiety of individuation by a
fantasy life in which fusion through the mechanism of cross-dressing
was the dominant theme. However, the defense of cross-dressing was
no longer effective; it evoked too much "death fear," and Rob was ter-
rified that his fantasies would take over, that he would lose himself in
that fusion.
   The attempt to assuage individuation anxiety through sexual merger
is common. The successful man who devotes himself utterly to power,
to getting ahead, standing out, and making a name for himself must at
some point come face to face with the lonely unprotectedness inherent
in individuation. Often this point is reached on business trips. When a
hard-striving man can no longer channel his energies and attention
into his work, when he must slow down in an unfamiliar setting, he of-
ten experiences terrible loneliness and deep frenzy. He searches for
sex, not a loving embrace, from a woman (which would stir up fears of
losing himself): he searches for manipulative sex, a sexual union that
permits him to continue to control life and limit awareness but that
provides a poultice for isolation and the underlying death anxiety. The
relationship is, of course, a charade; and at some deep level the individ-
ual recognizes his inauthentic mode of encountering another. The en-
suing guilt joins the anxiety and results in greater isolation and frenzy,
and in the need for still another woman, sometimes within minutes of
leaving the first.
   Sexual activity as a mode of assuaging death anxiety is often clinical-
ly observed. Patricia McElveen-Hoehn has reported a series of such in-
cidents: the sexually conservative woman who returns home for the fu-
neral of a parent or some close relative and takes with her a diaphragm
and uncharacteristically engages in a sexual relationship with a strang-
er or a casual friend; or the man who has had a severe coronary and on
the way to the hospital fondles his wife's breasts and presses for some
sexual exchange; or the man who, with a child dying of leukemia, be-
comes highly promiscuous. 36
   Another clinical example is provided by Tim, a thirty-year-old pa-
                                                                       145


                                                             I I DEATH
tient whose wife was dying of leukemia. Tim began therapy not be-
cause of overt grief but because of an alarming degree of sexual preoc-
cupation and compulsivity. He had led a monogamous life prior to his
wife's illness; but as she approached death, he began compulsively to
visit pornography films and singles' bars (running great risks of public
exposure) and masturbated several times a day, often while in bed with
his dying wife. On the night of his wife's funeral he sought out a pros-
titute. Tim's grief and his fear of his own death were easily discernible
beneath the sexual compulsivity. His dreams, which I shall describe in
the next chapter, give clear evidence of such concerns.
   A striking example of the relationship between sex and death oc-
curred when a patient of mine developed widespread, inoperable can-
cer of the cervix. Despite her obvious pain and cachexia, she had no
end of suitors-more, she said, than she had ever had during her
bloom. Her mates were dealing with death fears counterphobically.
They reported an exhilaration at being so close to the hub of life or, as
one put it, to the "bowels of the earth." They were, I believe, elated to
come so close to death, to spew in its face, and to emerge each time in-
tact and unscathed. The patient had a different motivation: despite in-
tense pelvic pain, she had a powerful craving for sex. She was so close
to death and so terrified of the loneliness of dying that she was en-
gulfed by the need to merge with another person. Ellen Greenberger
studied women with terminal cancer and on the basis of TAT scores re-
ports a significantly high incidence of illicit sexuality themes. 37
   The task of satisfying both needs-for separateness and autonomy
and for protection and merger-and of facing the fear inherent in
each, is a lifelong dialectic that govern one's inner world. It is a task
that begins in the first months of life, when the child, who first is sym-
biotically merged with the mother (and thereafter has an ever-dimin-
ishing emotional dependence on her) must, in order to develop a sense
of identity, of wholeness and separateness, disengage and differentiate
from the mother-a task referred to by Margaret Mahler as "separa-
tion -individuation." 38
THE COST OF NEUROTIC ADAPTATION
   The attempt to escape from death anxiety is at the core of the neurot-
ic conflict. Behavior becomes "neurotic" when it is extreme and rigid;
and hypertrophy of either of the major defenses against death results,
 as we have seen, in some form of neurotic adaptation. The neurotic life
 style is generated by a fear of death; but insofar as it limits one's ability
 to live spontaneously and creatively, the defense against death is itself
146


  4 I Death and Psychopathology
  a partial death. That is what Rank meant when he said that the neurotic
  refuses the loan of life to escape the debt of death: he buys himself free
  from the fear of death by daily partial self-destruction.39
    But self-restriction is not the end of the cost of neurotic adaptation.
  Because of guilt, the neurotic individual cannot escape scot-free even
  with the remnants of a life. Traditionally guilt is defined as the feeling
  that ensues from a real or fantasied transgression against another. It
  was Kierkegaard/ 0 and later Rank and Tillich/ 1 who called attention to
  another source of guilt-the transgression against oneself, the failure
  to live the life allotted to one. As Rank put it: "When we protect our-
  selves ... from a too intensive or too quick living out or living up, we
  feel ourselves guilty on account of the unused life, the unlived life in
  us." 42 Repression is thus a double-edged sword; it provides safety and
  relief from anxiety, while at the same time it generates life restriction
  and a form of guilt, henceforth referred to as "existential guilt." In
  chapter 6 I shall explore existential guilt in depth.
     Thus far I have discussed well-delineated neurotic adaptations to
  death anxiety. Let me now turn briefly to the consideration of the more
  primitive, fragmentary defenses against death anxiety that are found in
  schizophrenia.
                  Schizophrenia and the Fear of Death
  Though evidence is mounting that many forms of schizophrenia have
  an important biochemical component, there can be no evasion of the
  fact that schizophrenia is also a tragic human experience-one that can
  be apprehended from both a longitudinal (historical) and a cross-sec-
  tional (phenomenological) perspective. Crushing developmental
  stresses have contributed to the development of the schizophrenic pa-
- tient's world view, and he or she inhabits a terrifying and chaotic ex-
  periental world.
     Perhaps no contemporary therapist has made a more concerted and
  heroic effort to comprehend and explicate the world of the schizo-
  phrenic patient than has Harold Searles who treated deeply psychotic
  patients for many years at Chestnut Lodge in Rockville, Maryland. In
  1958 he wrote a deeply insightful but neglected article entitled
  "Schizophrenia and the Inevitability of Death" expressing his views on
                                                                         147


                                                                  I I DEATH
the psychodynamics of the schizophrenic patient. Searles's thesis is
summarized in this passage:
       The ostensibly prosaic fact of the inevitability of death is, in actuality,
       one of the supremely potent sources of man's anxiety, and the feeling-
       responses to this aspect of reality are among the most intense and com-
       plex which it is possible for us to experience. The defense-mechanisms
       of psychiatric illness, including the oftentimes exotic-appearing de-
       fenses found in schizophrenia, are designed to keep out of the individ-
       ual's awareness-among other anxiety-provoking aspects of inner and
       outer reality-this simple fact of life's finitude. ' 3
   Searles submits that the dynamics of the schizophrenic patient, like
those of the neurotic patient, may be fully understood only from the
perspective of the patient's response to the inevitability of his or her
death. Obviously the schizophrenic patient's defenses are more exotic,
more extreme, and more disabling than those of the neurotic patient.
Furthermore, the schizophrenic patient has an early life experience far
more devastating than that of the neurotic patient. But the existential
nature of human reality makes brothers and sisters of us all. Though
the magnitude of the threat or the characteristics of the response differ,
it is human finitude that bedevils the schizophrenic no less than the
neurotic. Searles states this brilliantly:
          To be sure, schizophrenia can be considered a result of exotic, warping
       experiences in the past-predominantly in infancy and early childhood;
       but it can equally accurately, and with greater clinical usefulness, the
       writer thinks, be seen as consisting in the use of certain defense-mecha-
       nisms, learned very early, to cope with present-day sources of anxiety.
       And of these latter, none is more potent than the existential circum-
       stance of life's finitude. In essence, then, the hypothesis here is that
       schizophrenia can be seen, from one among various other possible van-
       tage-points as an intense effort to ward off or deny this aspect of the hu-
       man situation.
          The author wishes to make quite clear that, in his experience, the fact
       of death's inevitability has a more than merely tangential relation to
       schizophrenia. That is, it is not a matter of the patient's becoming able,
       as he grows free here from his schizophrenia, to turn his attention yon-
       der to that great life-circumstance of the inevitability of death-a cir-
       cumstance which had previously lain inertly at the periphery of, or even
       quite totally beyond, his ken. On the contrary, the author's clinical work
       has indicated that the relationship is a much more central one than that:
       It is a matter, rather, of the patient's having become, and having long re-
       mained, schizophrenic (and reference here, of course, is to largely or
       wholly unconscious purposiveness) in order to avoid facing, among other as-
       pects of internal and external reality, the fact that life is finite."
148


 4 I Death and Psychopathology
   Traditional case histories of schizophrenic patients have always
stressed their bleak, conflicted early childhoods and the severe pathol-
ogy of their early family environments. But how would it be if a pa-
tient's real case history, an existential case history, were written? Part of
a psychiatric examination includes a mental status inquiry where the
interviewer attempts to discover whether the patient is oriented for
time, place, and person. Searles hypothesizes what one patient would
respond were he or she to be truly "oriented":
           I am Charles Brennan, a man who is now, this being Aprill5, 1953, 51
       years of age; who is living here in Chestnut Lodge, a psychiatric hospital
       in Rockville, Maryland; who has been living in a series of psychiatric
       hospitals constantly for eight years now; who has been seriously ill for
       over 25 years, with a mental illness which has robbed me of any realistic
       prospect, considering my present age, of ever being able to marry and
       have children, and which, quite possibly, will require my being hospi-
       talized for the remainder of my life. I am a man who was once a member
       of a family which included two parents and seven children, but who has
       seen, over the years, a crushing series of tragedies strike this family:
       Years ago my mother died, in a state of long-standing mental illness; one
       of my brothers developed a mental illness as a young man, requiring ex-
       tended hospitalization; another brother committed suicide; still another
       brother was killed in action in the Second World War; and a third was
       murdered only recently, at the height of his legal career, by a mentally
       ill client. My remaining parent, my father, is now elderly, a man patheti-
       cally far removed from the strong man he used to be, and death cannot
       be far off for him.' 5
   There is something stark and shocking about this particular case his-
tory, but perhaps more shocking yet is the knowledge that a similarly
tragic case history, one that focuses not on early development, educa-
tion, military service, object relations, sexual practices, but on the exis-
tential facts of life, can be written for every patient (and, indeed, for
ev~ry therapist).
   Searles described the course of therapy of a floridly psychotic patient
whom he treated for several years. At first the patient showed "abun-
dant evidence of a richly detailed, fascinatingly exotic and complex, ex-
tremely rigorously defended delusional system, replete with all man-
ner of horrendous concepts, ranging from brutal savagery to witchcraft
and to the intricate machinations of science fiction." Though the pa-
tient's world experience was terrifying, Searles noted that she ex-
pressed little concern about those givens that are terrifying to all hu-
mans-such as illness, aging, and inescapable death. She dealt with
                                                                             149


                                                                  I I DEATH
these issues with explicit and massive death denial: "There's no reason
for anybody in the world to be unhappy or miserable today; they have
antidotes for everything ... people don't die but in actuality are simply
'changed,' moved about from place to place or are made the unwitting
subjects of motion pictures."
   After three-and-one-half years of psychotherapy, the patient began
to develop a reality-based view of life and to accept that life-includ-
ing human life-is finite. During the months before this realization,
she had shown evidence of a last-ditch intensification of her delusional
defenses against the recognition of death's inevitability .
       . . . She came to spend most of her time picking up dead leaves and the
       occasional dead birds and small animals which hours of searching re-
       vealed, and buying all sorts of articles from the stores in the nearby com-
       munity, then by various alchemy-like processes, attempting to bring
       these to one or another form of life. It became very clear (and she herself
       substantiated this) that she felt herself to be God, selecting various dead
       leaves and other things to be brought to life. Many times the psycho-
       therapeutic sessions were held out on the hospital grounds; the therapist
       sat on a bench, while she went on with her daylong scrutinizing of the
       lawn nearby.
           But as these months wore on, toward the end of this period of denial
       of death, she came to express more and more openly a feeling of despair
       about this activity. Then there came an autumn day when, during the
       session, patient and therapist sat on benches not far apart and gazed to-
       gether at the leaf-strewn lawn. She let it be known, mainly in nonverbal
       ways, that she was filled with mellowness, tenderness, and grief. She
       said, with tears in her eyes, in a tone as of resignation to a fact that sim-
       ply has to be accepted, "I can't turn those leaves into sheep, for in-
       stance." The therapist replied, "I gather that you're realizing, perhaps,
       that it's this way with human life, too-that, as with the leaves, human
       life ends in death." She nodded, "Yes."
This realization marked the beginning of solid therapeutic progress.
The patient gradually relinquished her major defense against death:
her belief in her own omnipotence and invulnerability. She realized:
       ... that she was not God ... and that we human beings are mortal. This
       showed that the very foundation of her paranoid schizophrenic illness
       was now crumbling, an illness which had involved her years-long con-
      viction, for example, that both her deceased parents were still living.••
   Though the defenses of this woman, and of other schizophrenic pa-
tients whom Searles describes, are extreme and exceedingly primitive,
they are nonetheless homologous to the defensive patterns found in
neurotic patients. The paranoid patient, for example, evinces, in delu-
150


4 I Death and Psychopathology
sions of grandeur and omnipotence, one of the primary modes of evad-
ing death-a belief in one's own specialness and immortality.
   Many if not all schizophrenic patients are unable to experience
themselves as fully alive. No doubt this deadness is a function of the
global repression of all affect in the schizophrenic patient, but it may
also serve, Searles suggests, an additional defensive purpose: being
"dead" may protect the patient from death. A limited death is better
than the real death. One need not fear death if one is dead anyway.
   But all of us must face death. If the fear of death is a core dynamic in
the schizophrenic patient, we must answer the riddle why it is that the
schizophrenic patient is brought down by this ubiquitous fear. Searles
suggests several reasons.
   First, the anxiety of facing death is infinitely greater in those who do
not have the strengthening knowledge of personal wholeness and of
whole participation in living. "A person," Searles writes, "cannot bear
to face the prospect of inevitable death until he has had the experience
of fully living, and the schizophrenic has not yet fully lived. " 47 Nor-
man Brown in his extraordinary book, Life Against Death, makes a simi-
lar statement: "Only he who can affirm birth can affirm death .... The
horror of death is the horror of dying with unlived lives in our bod-
ies."48 (This thesis-that death anxiety is greatly heightened by life
failure-has considerable implications for therapy and is discussed in
the following chapter.)
   A second reason that the schizophrenic is overwhelmed by death
anxiety is that the patient has suffered enormous losses so early in de-
velopment that he or she has not been able to integrate them. Owing to
having an immature ego, the patient reacts to the losses pathologically,
generally by a reinforcement of subjective infantile omnipotence,
which serves to negate the loss (one cannot suffer loss if one is the
whole world). Thus, not having been able to integrate losses in the
past, the patient is unable in the present to integrate the prospect of the
greatest of all losses-the loss of oneself and of everyone one knows.
The patient's primary shield against death, then, is a sense of omnipo-
tence, a key feature in any schizophrenic illness.
   A third source of intense death anxiety emanates from the nature of
the schizophrenic patient's early relationship to mother-a symbiotic
union from which the patient has never emerged but in which he or
she continues to oscillate between a position of psychological merger
and a state of total unrelatedness. The patient's experience of relating
to mother is not unlike negotiating a magnetic field: veer too close and
be suddenly sucked in, move away too far and drift away into nothing-
                                                                        151


                                                          I I DEATH
ness. The symbiotic relationship requires, for its maintenance, that nei-
ther party experience himself or herself as independently whole: each
needs the other to complete his or her wholeness. Thus the patient
never develops the sense of wholeness necessary to experience life
fully.
   Furthermore, the schizophrenic patient perceives that the symbiotic
relationship is absolutely necessary to survival: the patient needs pro-
tection against any threats to the relationship; and among those threats
none is as dangerous as his or her (and his or her mother's) intense am-
bivalence. The child has a sense of profound helplessness in feeling
the deepest hate toward the person whom he or she most deeply loves.
The child is helpless, too, in the face of the knowledge that this same
person loves and hates him or her with great intensity. This helpless-
ness requires continued maintenance of the fantasy, normal only in in-
fancy, of personal omnipotence. Nothing would so completely destroy
the sense of personal omnipotence than the acceptance of the inevita-
bility of death, and the schizophrenic patient clings to his or her denial
of death with a fierce desperation.
           An Existential Paradigm of Psychopathology:
                          Research Evidence
In this chapter I postulate that, though denial of death is ubiquitous,
and though the specific modes of death denial are highly varied, there
are two major bulwarks of denial: belief in personal specialness and be-
lief in an ultimate rescuer. These defenses originate early in life and
greatly influence the individual's character structure. An individual
believing strongly in an ultimate rescuer (and striving toward fusion,
merger, or embeddedness) will look for strength outside of himself or
herself; will take a dependent, supplicant pose toward others; will re-
press aggression; may show masochistic trends; and may become deep-
ly depressed at the loss of the dominant other. The individual oriented
toward specialness and inviolability (and striving toward emergence,
individuation, autonomy, or separateness) may be narcissistic; is often
a compulsive achiever; is likely to direct aggression outward; may be
self-reliant to the point of rejecting necessary, appropriate help from
others; may be harshly unaccepting of his or her own personal frailties
152


 4 I Death and Psychopathology
and limits; and is likely to show expansive, sometimes grandiose
 trends.
    There is no direct empirical evidence for the existence of this emer-
gence-embeddedness dialectic-but neither is there any for other clini-
cal psychopathology paradigms posited by Freud, Sullivan, Horney,
Fromm, or Jung: clinical paradigms always emerge intuitively and are
justified and validated by their clinical usefulness. However, analogous
personality constructs have been posited and closely studied along two
robust avenues of inquiry: laboratory research on cognitive styles and
personality research on locus of control.
 COGNITIVE STYLE
    Herman Witkin in 1949 identified two basic perceptual modes-field
 dependence and field independence-which seem analogous to ulti-
 mate rescuer and specialness personality organization. 49 In the "field-
 dependent" mode (analogous to the ultimate rescuer style) the individ-
 ual's perception is strongly dominated by the global organization of
 the field. In the "field-independent" mode (analogous to the special-
 ness style) parts of the field are experienced as discrete from the back-
 ground. A great deal of research has demonstrated that a tendency
 toward one or the other modes of perception is a consistent and perva-
 sive characteristic of an individual's functioning. Across a wide variety
 of perceptual tasks• the field-dependent individual is unable to keep
 foreground apart from environmental context, whereas the field-inde-
 pendent individual has no difficulty with these tasks. Thus the tests
 demonstrate a stylistic tendency of the individual which, as it turns
 out, is not limited to perception but is a pervasive cognitive style, evi-
    •There are many perceptual tests that can be used to demonstrate this phenomenon.
For example, in the body-adjustment test, an individual is placed in a chair that can be
tilted right or left, and the chair is placed in a small room that can also be tilted right or
left. The subject is asked to make his or her body upright with respect to gravity while
the room about him or her is tilted. The field-dependent individuals are not able to sepa-
rate themselves from the position of the surrounding room. In other words, if the room is
tilted, they will tilt themselves accordingly and report that they are upright even though
their bodies may be objectively tilted as much as forty-five degrees. The field-indepen-
dent subjects are, regardless of the position of the surrounding room, able to bring their
bodies close to the true upright. Thus, the field-dependent individuals seem to have a fu-
sion of body and field, whereas the field-independent individuals seem to have an im-
mediate sense of the separateness of their bodies from the background.
    In an analogous test the individual is presented with a luminous rod and frame (the
only objects visible in a darkened room) and asked to place the rod to the true upright
position regardless of the tilt of the frame. The embedded-figures test asks an individual
to study some complex designs in which are imbedded some particular simple figures.
The field-dependent individuals cannot perceive the simple figure, while for the field-
independent individual the simple figure is obvious and "pops out" of the design.
                                                                                          153


                                                                      I I DEATH
dent in the individual's intellectual activities, body concept, and sense
of separate identity.
   Intellectual Activities. The field-dependent individual does less well
than the field-independent one at solving problems that require the
isolation of a central element from its context. Such tendencies are
called "cognitive styles." There is a consistent tendency at one extreme
for experience to be global and diffuse, and at the other for it to be de-
lineated and structured. Witkin refers to these poles of cognitive style
as "global" and "articulated," respectively. It is important, however, to
underscore the fact that the world is not peopled by two kinds of be-
ing: scores on cognitive style show continuous distribution rather than
bipolar distribution.
   Body Image. Not only do the styles of an individual influence what
is perceived "out there," but they also influence experience "within."
Tests of body image (for example draw-a-person tests) strongly suggest
that the way an individual perceives his or her body is significantly re-
lated to his or her performance on perceptual and cognitive tests. Indi-
viduals with a field-dependent ("global") style demonstrate little detail,
unrealistic representation of proportion and body parts, and little at-
tempt at sex role representation; field-independent ("articulated") indi-
viduals show clear representation of proportion and sex differences.
   Identity. Persons with a field-independent cognitive style give evi-
dence of a developed sense of separate identity: that is to say, they have
an awareness of needs, feelings, attributes that they recognize as their
own and that they identify as distinct from those of others. On the oth-
er hand, individuals with a field-dependent cognitive style rely heav-
ily on external sources for definition of their attitudes, judgments, sen-
 timents, and of their views of themselves. • For example, studies have
demonstrated that field-dependent persons look at the face of the adult
examiner much more frequently than do field-independent ones. Fur-
 thermore, field-dependent persons are better at recognizing faces of
 those whom they have seen earlier, and more often have dreams con-
cerned with their own relation to the experimenter.
   Cognitive Style and Death Denial. The "field-dependent" individuaL
 defined experimentally, closely resembles the clinical characterization
   • A field-dependent individual who is placed in an autokinetic situation changes his
or her judgment about the movement of a point of light in conformance with the sugges-
tion of a planted confederate. (The autokinetic situation asks an individual to look at a
stationary point of light in a dark room and to estimate how much this point of light has
moved. The light itself does not move but the individual may be more or less influenced
by estimates of experimental subjects, or confederates, who precede him or her in the
experiment.)
154


4 I Death and Psychopathology
of the individual oriented toward the existence of an ultimate rescuer;
the "field-independent" person resembles one oriented toward a belief
in personal specialness. The field-dependence and field-independence
dialectic is derived entirely from empirical studies of perceptual and
cognitive function but is devoid of subjective content. I would submit
that the existential dialectic described herein is related to this empirical
dialectic in the same way that "dread" is related to galvanic skin re-
sponse: the existential dialectic provides the personal meaning, the
phenomenological experience, of the individual who is categorized ac-
cording to one of these cognitive styles. Let me carry the analogy far-
ther and compare the empirical linkage between cognitive style and
psychopathology with the observations made earlier in this chapter
about the psychopathology associated with each of the major defenses
against death anxiety.
   Psychopathology and Cognitive Styles. The individual's cognitive style
is closely related to "choice" of psychological defense and to the form
of psychopathology. Field dependence-independence is a continuum,
at both extremes of which psychopathology occurs; furthermore, pa-
thology takes quite different forms at the two extremes.
   A field-dependent individual with personality disturbances is likely
to have severe identity problems, with symptoms often considered sug-
gestive of deep-seated problems of dependence, passivity, and help-
lessness. Several studies indicate that such a patient develops symp-
toms related to lack of development of a "sense of separate identity,"
such as alcoholism, obesity, inadequate personality, depression, and
psychophysiological reactions (for example, asthma). A psychotic pa-
tient is likely to hallucinate-as compared with a field-independent
one who is likely to be delusionat.S 0
   A field-independent individual who develops pathology is likely to
show outward aggression, delusions, expansive and euphoric ideas of
grandeur, paranoid syndromes, and depressive compulsive character
structures.
   Interesting observations have also been made about differences be-
tween field-dependent and field-independent persons who enter psy-
chotherapy. The major difference centers around the transference. As
one could predict, a field-dependent patient tends to develop a quick
and highly positive transference to the therapist and to feel better ear-
lier than a field-independent patient. A field-dependent patient tends
to "fuse" with the therapist, whereas a field-independent one is likely
to be much more cautious in the development of a relationship with
the therapist. A field-independent patient comes to the first session
with an articulated account of and ideas about his or her problems,
                                                                        155


                                                                         I I DEATH
whereas a field-dependent patient is nonspecific. A field-dependent
individual readily accepts the therapist's suggestions and solicits sup-
port from him or her, and attempts to prolong the sessions owing to
feelings of anxiety at the end of the hour.
   The cognitive style of the psychotherapist is an important determi-
nant of the psychotherapeutic context. Psychotherapists who are them-
selves field-independent tend to favor either a directive or passive, ob-
servational approach to a patient, whereas field-dependent therapists
favor personal and mutual relationships with their patients.
   The similarities are obvious: extremity, either in field dependency or
in orientation toward an ultimate rescuer results in pathology charac-
terized by passivity, dependency, orality, lack of autonomous function,
inadequacy; an extreme field independence or specialness may result
in pathological expansiveness, paranoid syndromes, aggression, or
compulsivity. These observations receive additional support from an-
other line of inquiry-locus of control, an empirically derived person-
ality paradigm that also closely resembles the specialness-ultimate res-
cuer clinical paradigm.
LOCUS OF CONTROL
   Beginning with the work of Joseph Rotter 51 and E. Jerry Phares,S 2
many researchers have been interested in a paradigm of personality
that investigates whether the individual has either an internal or an ex-
ternal locus of control. Does one feel that one controls the events of
one's life, or does one feel that these events occur independently of
one's actions? Most of the research in internal-external control is based
on an instrument-the I.E. scale • developed by Rotter in 1966 and used
in several hundred research studies 55 since that time.
   • The I.E. (Internal-External) scale is a twenty-three-item forced-choice self-assessment
questionnaire. Some sample paired items:
     a. People are lonely because they don't try to be friendly.
     b. There's not much use in trying too hard to please people, if they like you they
        like you.
     a. What happens to me is my own doing.
     b. Sometimes I feel that I don't have enough control over the direction my life is
        taking.••
There is also a form for preschool children with such items as:
     a. When you get a hole in your pants, is that
        a) because you tore them, or
        b) because they wore out.
     b. If you had a shiny new penny and lost it, would that be
        a) because you dropped it, or
        b) because there was a hole in your pocket."
156


4 I Death and Psychopathology
   "Internals" have an internal locus of control and feel they control
their personal destiny; "externals" place control external to themselves
and look outside themselves for answers, support and guidance.
   Internals differ from externals in a vast number of ways. Internals
tend to be more independent, more achieving, more politically active,
and have a greater sense of personal power. They are more power seek-
ing, they direct their efforts toward gaining mastery over their envi-
ronment. "Internal" patients hospitalized for tuberculosis know more
about their condition, are more inquisitive about the disease and their
situation, and indicate that they are not satisfied with the amount of in-
formation they are getting from physicians and nurses. 56 When given
TAT cards and subtly prompted by the tester, internals are far less open
to suggestion and influence than are externals. 57
   In general, then, internals acquire more information and are better at
retaining and utilizing it to control their own world. Internals are less
suggestible and are more. independent and more reliant upon their
own judgment. They, in contrast to externals, evaluate information on
the basis of its merit rather than responding on the basis of the prestige
or expertise of the source of the information. Internals are more likely
to be high achievers and more likely to delay gratification so as to at-
tain larger rewards at a later date. Externals are far more suggestible,
tend more often to be smokers or to take high risks at gambling, and
are lower in achievement, dominance, and endurance and higher in
desiring succor from others and self-abasement. 58
   These characterizations and the previous ones about field-indepen-
dents (or believers in specialness) and field-dependents (or believers in
the rescuer) are clearly similar. We may integrate these findings by
imagining a continuum with field dependency, external locus of con-
trol, and orientation toward an ultimate rescuer on one pole and field
independence, internal locus of control, and orientation toward per-
sonal specialness on the other. A position on either extreme end of the
continuum is highly correlated with clinically evident psychopathol-
ogy. Much research, however, indicates that one pole of the continuum
constitutes a personality organization that is less effective and more
likely to result in psychopathology. Individuals at the field-dependent,
the external locus of control pole are more likely to have demonstrable
psychopathology than individuals at the field-independent, or internal
locus of control, pole.59 Individuals with high external locus of control
scores are more likely to feel inadequate; 60 to be more anxious, hostile,
fatigued, confused, and depressed/ 1 to have less vigor and resiliency. 62
Severely impaired psychiatric patients are more likely to be externals. 63
Schizophrenics are far more likely to be externals.64 A great deal of re-
                                                                      157


                                                          I I DEATH
search demonstrates a strong relationship between external locus of
control and depression. 65
  These research findings accord with clinical experience. More indi-
viduals seek therapy because of the failure of the rescuer defense (de-
pendency cravings, low self-esteem, self-contempt, helplessness, mas-
ochistic trends, depression because of the loss, or threat of loss, of their
dominant other) than because of specialness breakdown. One team of
investigators reported a positive correlation between the external locus
of control mode and death anxiety. 66 In other words, the external mode
seemed a less effective shield against death anxiety than did the inter-
nal mode. (However, another experiment, using different death anxi-
ety instruments, failed to replicate these findings.) 67
  The defense of belief in an outside deliverer seems inherently
limited. Not only does it not entirely contain primal anxiety but by its
very nature it spawns additional pathology: the belief that one's life is
controlled by external forces is associated with a sense of powerless-
ness, ineffectualness, and low self-regard. One who does not rely on or
believe in oneself limits accordingly one's acquisition of information
and skills, and may relate to others in an ingratiating manner. It is
readily apparent that low self-esteem, a tendency toward self-abase-
ment, few skills on which to build a sense of self-worth, and unsatisfy-
ing interpersonal relationships, all prepare the soil for psycho-
pathology.
158


                   CHAPTER 5
 Death and Psychotherapy
LIE     LEAP from theory to practice ;, not easy. In thi' chapter I 'hall
transport us from metaphysical concerns about death to the office of
the practicing psychotherapist and attempt to extract from those con-
cerns what is relevant to everyday therapy.
   The reality of death is important to psychotherapy in two distinct
ways: death awareness may act as a "boundary situation" and instigate
a radical shift in life perspective; and death is a primary source of anxi-
ety. I shall discuss the application of each way, in turn, to the tech-
nique of therapy.
                     Death as a Boundary Situation
A "boundary situation" is an event, an urgent experience, that propels
one into a confrontation with one's existential"situation" in the world.
A confrontation with one's personal death ("my death") is the nonpa-
reil boundary situation and has the power to provide a massive shift in
the way one lives in the world. "Though the physicality of death de-
stroys an individual, the idea of death can save him." Death acts as a
                                                                       159


                                                           I I DEATH
catalyst that can move one from one state of being to a higher one:
from a state of wondering about how things are to a state of wonder-
ment that they are. An awareness of death shifts one away from trivial
preoccupations and provides life with depth and poignancy and an en-
tirely different perspective.
   Earlier I considered illustrative examples from literature and clinical
records of individuals who, after a confrontation with death, have un-
dergone a radical personal transformation. Tolstoy's Pierre in War and
Peace and Ivan Ilyich in "The Death of Ivan Ilyich" are obvious in-
stances of "personality change" or "personal growth." Another strik-
ing illustration is everyone's favorite miraculously transformed hero:
Ebenezer Scrooge. Many of us forget that Scrooge's transformation was
not simply the natural result of yule warmth melting his icy counte-
nance. What changed Scrooge was a confrontation with his own death.
Dickens's Ghost of the Future (Ghost of the Christmas Yet to Come)
used a powerful form of existential shock therapy: Scrooge was per-
mitted to observe his own death, to overhear members of the commu-
nity discuss his death and then dismiss it lightly, and to watch stran-
gers quarreling over his material possessions, including even his
bedsheets and nightshirt. Scrooge then witnessed his own funeral and,
finally, in the last scene before his transformation, Scrooge knelt in the
churchyard and examined the letters of his name inscribed on his
tombstone.
DEATH CONFRONTATION AND PERSONAL CHANGE: MECHANISM OF
ACTION
   How does death awareness instigate personal change? What is the
inner experience of the individual thus transformed? Chapter 2 pre-
sents some data that indicates the type and the degree of positive
change that some terminal cancer patients have undergone. Interviews
with these patients provide insights into some of the mechanisms of
change.
   Cancer Cures Psychoneurosis. One patient had disabling interpersonal
phobias that almost miraculously dissolved after she developed cancer.
When asked about this cure, she responded, "Cancer cures psychoneur-
osis." Although she tossed this statement off almost flippantly, there is
an arresting truth in it: not the dismal truth that death eliminates life
with all its attendant sorrows, but the optimistic truth that the anticipa-
tion of death provides a rich perspective for life concerns. When asked
to describe her transformation, she stated that it was a simple process:
having faced and, she felt, conquered her fear of death-a fear that had
160


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
dwarfed all her other fears-she experienced a strong sense of personal
mastery.
   Existence Cannot Be Postponed. Eva, forty-five years old and deeply
depressed, had advanced ovarian cancer and was highly conflicted
about whether she should take one last trip. In the midst of our thera-
peutic work she reported this dream:
          There was a large crowd of people. It looked something like a Cecil B.
       DeMille scene. I can recognize my mother in there. They were all chant-
       ing, "You can't go, you have cancer, you are ill." The chanting went on
       and on. Then I heard my dead father, a quiet reassuring voice, saying, "I
       know you have lung cancer like me, but don't stay home and eat chicken
       soup, waiting to die like me. Go to Africa-live."
   Eva's father had died many years ago of a lingering cancer. She last
saw him several months before his death and had sorrowed not only at
her loss but at the way he died. No one in the family had dared tell him
about his cancer, and the symbol of staying home and eating chicken
soup was apt: his remaining life and his death were unenlightened and
unheroic. The dream bore powerful counsel; Eva heeded it well and al-
tered her life dramatically. She confronted her physician and demand-
ed all available information about her cancer and insisted that she
share in the decisions made about her treatment. She re-established old
friendships; she shared her fears with others and helped them share
their grief with her. She did take that last journey to Africa which,
though it was cut short by illness, did leave her with the satisfaction of
having drunk deeply from life until the last draught.
   The matter can be summed up simply: "Existence cannot be post-
poned." Many patients with cancer report that they live more fully in
the present. They no longer postpone living until some time in the fu-
ture. They realize that one can really live only in the present; in fact,
one cannot outlive the present-it always keeps up with you. Even in
the moment of looking back over one's life-even in the last mo-
ment-one is still there, experiencing, living. The present, not the fu-
ture, is the eternal tense.
   I remember a thirty-year-old patient who was obsessed by the vision
of herself as an old woman spending Christmas alone. Haunted by this
vision, she spent much of her adult life in frantic pursuit of a mate-so
frantic a pursuit that she frightened away any prospective suitors. She
rejected the present and devoted her life to rediscovering the security
of early childhood. The neurotic obliterates the present by trying to
find the past in the future. It is, of course, paradoxical; and I shall have
                                                                           161


                                                           I I DEATH
more to say of this later, that it is the person who will not "live" who is
most terrified of dying. "Why not," Kazantzakis asked, "like a well-
filled guest, leave the feast of life?" 1
   Another individual, a university professor, as a result of a serious
bout with cancer, decided to enjoy the future in the immediate present.
He discovered, with astonishment, that he could choose not to do those
things he did not wish to do. When he recovered from his surgery and
returned to work, his behavior changed strikingly: he divested himself
of onerous administrative duties, immersed himself in the most excit-
ing aspects of his research (eventually attaining national prominence),
and-let this be a lesson to us all-never attended another faculty
meeting.
   Fran was chronically depressed and fearful and had for fifteen years
been locked into a highly unsatisfying marriage which she could not
bring herself to end. The final obstacle to separation was her husband's
extensive home aquarium! She wished to remain in the house so that
her children could keep their friends and remain in the same school;
yet she could not undertake the two hours of time needed for the daily
feeding of the fish. Nor could the huge aquarium be moved except at
enormous expense. The problem seemed insoluble. (On such trifling is-
sues is a life sacrificed.)
   Fran then developed a malignant form of bone cancer which brought
home to her the simple fact that this was her one and only life. She said
that she suddenly realized that time's clock runs continuously, and that
there are no "time-outs" when it stops. Though her illness was so se-
vere that her need for her husband's physical and economic support
were very great indeed, she was nonetheless able to make the coura-
geous decision to separate, the decision she had postponed for a
decade.
   Death reminds us that existence cannot be postponed. And that there
is still time for life. If one is fortunate enough to encounter his or her
death and to experience life as the "possibility of possibility" (Kierke-
gaard)2 and to know death as the "impossibility of further possibility"
(Heidegger)/ then one realizes that, as long as one lives, one has possi-
bility-one can alter one's life until-but only until-the last moment.
If, however, one dies tonight, then all of tomorrow's intentions and
promises die stillborn. That is what Ebenezer Scrooge learned; in fact,
the pattern of his transformation consisted of a systematic reversal of
his misdeeds of the previous day: he tipped the caroler he had cursed,
he donated money to the charity workers he had spurned, he embraced
the nephew he had scorned, he gave coal, food, and money to Cratchit
whom he had tyrannized.
162


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
  Count Your Blessings. Another mechanism of change energized by a
confrontation with death was well illustrated by a patient who had
cancer that had invaded her esophagus. Swallowing became difficult;
gradually she shifted to soft foods, then to pureed foods, then to liq-
uids. One day in a cafeteria, after having been unable even to swallow
some clear broth, she looked around at the other diners and wondered,
"Do they realize how lucky they are to be able to swallow? Do they
ever think of that?" She applied this simple principle to herself and be-
came aware of what she could do and could experience: the elemental
facts of life, the changing seasons, the beauty of her natural surround-
ings, seeing, listening, touching, and loving. Nietzsche expresses this
principle in a beautiful passage:
       Out of such abysses, from such severe sickness one returns newborn,
       having shed one's skin, more ticklish and malicious, with a more deli-
       cate taste for joy, with a more tender tongue for all good things, with
       merrier senses, with a second dangerous innocence in joy, more child-
       like and yet a hundred times subtler than one has ever seen before!
  Count your blessings! How rarely do we benefit from that simple
homily? Ordinarily what we do have and what we can do slips out of
awareness, diverted by thoughts of what we lack or what we cannot do,
or dwarfed by petty concerns and threats to our prestige or our pride
systems. By keeping death in mind, one passes into a state of gratitude,
of appreciation for the countless givens of existence. This is what the
Stoics meant when they said, "Contemplate death if you would learn
how to live." 5 The imperative is not, then, a call to a morbid death pre-
occupation but instead an urging to keep both figure and ground info-
cus so that being becomes conscious and life becomes richer. As Santa-
yana put it: "The dark background which death supplies brings out the
tender colors of life in all their purity." 6
   Disidentification. In everyday clinical work the psychotherapist en-
counters individuals who are severely anxious in the face of events that
do not seem to warrant anxiety. Anxiety is a signal that one perceives
some threat to one's continued existence. The problem is that the neu-
rotic person's security is so tentative that he or she extends his or her
defensive perimeter a long way into space. In other words, the neurotic
not only protects his or her core but defends many other attributes
(work, prestige, role, vanity, sexual prowess, or athletic ability) with
the same intensity. Many individuals become inordinately stressed,
therefore, at threats to their career or to any of a number of other attri-
butes. They believe in effect, "I am my career," or "I am my sexual at-
tractiveness." The therapist wishes to say, "No, you are not your career,
                                                                          163


                                                            1/DEATH
you are not your splendid body, you are not mother or father or wise
man or eternal nurse. You are your self, your core essence. Draw a line
around it: the other things, the things that fall outside, they are not
you; they can vanish, and you will still exist."
   Unfortunately such self-evident exhortations, like all self-evident ex-
hortations, are rarely effective in catalyzing change. Psychotherapists
look for methods to increase the power of the exhortation. One such
method I have used, with groups of cancer patients as well as in the
classroom, is a structured "disidentification" exercise.* The procedure
is simple and takes approximately thirty to forty-five minutes. I choose
a quiet peaceful setting and ask the participants to list, on separate
cards, eight important answers to the question "Who am I?" I then ask
them to review their eight answers and to arrange their cards in order
of importance and centricity: the answers closest to their core at bot-
tom, the more peripheral responses at the top. Then I ask them to study
their top card and meditate on what it would be like to give up that at-
tribute. After approximately two to three minutes I ask them (some qui-
et signal like a bell is less distracting) to go on to the next card and so
on until they have divested themselves of all eight attributes. Follow-
ing that, it is advisable to help the participants integrate by going
through the procedure in reverse.
   This simple exercise generates powerful emotions. I once led three
hundred individuals in an adult education workshop through it; and,
even years afterward, participants gratuitously informed me how mo-
mentously important the procedure had been to them. Disidentifica-
tion is an important part of Roberto Assagioli's system of psychosyn-
thesis. He tries to help an individual reach his "center of pure self-
consciousness" by asking him to imagine shedding, in a systematic
way, his body, emotions, desires, and finally intellect. 7
   The individual with a chronic illness who copes well with his or her
situation often spontaneously goes through this process of disidentifi-
cation. One patient whom I remember well had always closely identi-
fied herself with her physical energy and activities. Her cancer gradu-
ally weakened her to the point where she could no longer backpack,
ski, or hike, and she mourned these losses for a long time. Her range of
physical activities inexorably diminished, but eventually she was able
to transcend her losses. After months of work in therapy she was able
to accept the limitations, to say, "I cannot do it" without a sense of per-
   •suggested to me by James Bugental.
164


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
sonal worthlessness and futility. Then she transmuted her energy into
other forms of expression that were within her limits. She set feasible
final projects for herself: completing personal and professional unfin-
ished business, expressing unvoiced sentiments to other patients,
friends, doctors, and children. Much later she was able to take another,
major step-to disidentify even with her energy and impact and to re-
alize that she existed apart from these, indeed apart from all other
qualities.
   Disidentification is an obvious and ancient mechanism of change-
the transcendence of material and social accouterments has long been
embodied in ascetic traditions-but is not easily available for clinical
use. It is the awareness of death that promotes a shift in perspective
and makes it possible for an individual to distinguish between core and
accessory: to reinvest one and to divest the other.
DEATH AWARENESS IN EVERYDAY PSYCHOTHERAPY
   If we psychotherapists accept that awareness of personal death can
catalyze a process of personal change, then it is our task to facilitate a
patient's awareness of death. But how? Many of the examples I have
cited are of individuals in an extraordinary situation. What about the
psychotherapist treating the everyday patient-who does not have ter-
minal cancer, or who is not facing a firing squad, or who has not had a
near fatal accident?
   Several of my cancer patients posed the same question. When speak-
ing of their growth and what they had learned from their confronta-
tion with death, they lamented, "What a tragedy that we had to wait
till now, till our bodies were riddled with cancer, to learn these
truths!"
   There are many structured exercises that the therapist may employ to
simulate an encounter with death. Some of these are interesting, and I
shall describe them shortly. But the most important point I wish to
make in this regard is that the therapist does not need to provide the ex-
perience; instead, the therapist needs merely to help the patient recog-
nize that which is everywhere about him or her. Ordinarily we deny, or
selectively inattend to, reminders of our existential situation; the task
of the therapist is to reverse this process, to pursue these reminders, for
they are not, as I have attempted to demonstrate, enemies but powerful
allies in the pursuit of integration and maturity.
   Consider this illustrative vignette. A forty-six-year-old mother takes
the youngest of her four children to the airport where he departs for
college. She has spent the last twenty-six years rearing her children
                                                                       165


                                                           I I DEATH
and longing for this day. No more impositions, no more incessantly
living for others, no more cooking dinners and picking up clothes,
only to be reminded of her futile efforts by dirty dishes and a room in
new disarray. Finally she is free.
   Yet, as she says goodbye, she unexpectedly begins sobbing loudly,
and on the way home from the airport a deep shudder passes through
her body. "It is only natural," she thinks. It is only the sadness of say-
ing goodbye to someone she loves very much. But it is more than that.
The shudder persists and shortly turns into raw anxiety. What could it
be? She consults a therapist. He soothes her. It is but a common prob-
lem: the "empty nest" syndrome. For so many years she has based her
self-esteem on her performance as mother and housekeeper. Suddenly
she finds no way to validate herself. Of course she is anxious: the rou-
tine, the structure of her life have been altered, and her life role and
primary source of self-esteem have been removed. Gradually, with the
help of Valium, supportive psychotherapy, an assertiveness training
women's group, several adult education courses, a lover or two, and a
part-time volunteer job, the shudder shrinks to a tremble and then van-
ishes altogether. She returns to her "premorbid" level of comfort and
adaptation.
   This patient, treated by a psychiatric resident, some years ago, was
part of a psychotherapy outcome research project. Her treatment results
could only be described as excellent: on each of the measures used-
symptom check lists, target problem evaluation, self-esteem-she had
made considerable improvement. Even now, in retrospect, it seems
clear that the psychotherapist fulfilled his function. Yet I also look
upon this course of treatment as a "misencounter," as an instance of
missed therapeutic opportunities.
  I compare it with another patient I saw recently in almost precisely
the same life situation. In the treatment of this patient I attempted to
nurse the shudder rather than to anesthetize it. The patient exper-
ienced what Kierkegaard called "creative anxiety," and her anxiety led
us into important areas. It was true that she had problems of self-es-
teem, she did suffer from "empty nest" syndrome, and she also was
deeply troubled by her great ambivalence toward her child: she loved
him but also resented and envied him for the chances in life she had
never had (and, of course, she felt guilty because of these "ignoble"
sentiments).
   We followed her shudder, and it led us into important realms and
raised fundamental questions. It was true enough that she could find
ways to fill her time, but what was the meaning of the fear of the empty
166


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
nest? She had always desired freedom but now, having achieved it, was
terrified of it. Why?
   A dream helped to illuminate the meaning of the shudder. Her son
who had just left home for college had been an acrobat and a juggler in
high school. Her dream consisted simply of herself holding in her
hand a 35-millimeter photographic slide of her son juggling. The slide
was peculiar, however, in that it was a slide in movement: it showed
her son juggling and tumbling in a multitude of movements all at the
same time. Her associations to the dream revolved around time. The
slide captured and framed time and movement. It kept everything alive
but made everything stand still. It froze life. "Time moves on," she
said, "and there's no way I can stop it. I didn't want John to grow up. I
really treasured those years when he was with us. Yet whether I like it
or not, time moves on. It moves on for John and it moves on for me as
well. It is a terrible thing to understand, to really understand."
   This dream brought her own finiteness into clear focus, and rather
than rush to fill time with distractions, she learned to wonder at and to
appreciate time and life in richer ways than she previously had. She
moved into the realm that Heidegger describes as authentic being: she
wondered not at the way that things are but that things are. In my judg-
ment, therapy helped the second patient more than the first. It would
not be possible to demonstrate this conclusion on standard outcome
measures; in fact, the second patient probably continued to experience
more anxiety than the first did. But anxiety is a part of existence, and
no individual who continues to grow and to create will ever be free of
it. Nevertheless, such a value judgment evokes many questions about
the therapist's role. Is the therapist not assuming too much? Does the
patient engage his or her services as a guide to existential awareness?
Or do not most patients say in effect, "I feel bad, help me feel better";
and if this is the case, why not use the speediest, most efficient means
at one's disposal-for example, pharmacological tranquilization or be-
havioral modification? Such questions, which pertain to all forms of
treatment based on self-awareness, cannot be ignored, and they will
emerge again and again in this text.
   In the treatment of every patient, situations arise that, if sensitively
emphasized by the therapist, would increase the patient's awareness of
the existential dimensions of his or her problems. The most obvious sit-
uations are the stark reminders of finiteness and the irreversibility of
time. The death of someone close will, if the therapist persists, always
lead to an increased death awareness. There are many components to
grief-the sheer loss, the ambivalence and guilt, the disruption of a life
                                                                       167


                                                               I I DEATH
plan-and all need to be thoroughly dealt with in treatment. But, as I
stressed earlier, the death of another also brings one closer to facing
one's own death; and this part of the grief work is commonly omitted.
Some psychotherapists may feel that the bereaved is already too over-
whelmed to accept the added task of dealing with his or her own fi-
niteness. I think, however, that assumption is often an error: some in-
dividuals can grow enormously as a result of personal tragedy.
   The Death of Another and Existential Awareness. For many, the death
of a close fellow creature offers the most intimate recognition one can
have of one's own death. Paul Landsburg, discussing the death of a
loved one, says:
          We have constituted an "us" with the dying person. And it is in this
       "us," it is through the specific power of this new and utterly personal
       being that we are led toward the living awareness of our own having to
       die .... My community with that person seems to be broken off; but this
       community in some degree was I myself, I feel death in the heart of my
       own existence.•
John Donne made the same point in his famous sermon: "And there-
fore never send to know for whom the bell tolls. It tolls for thee." 9
   The loss of a parent brings us in touch with our vulnerability; if our
parents could not save themselves, who will save us? With parents
gone nothing stands between ourselves and the grave. On the contrary,
we become the barrier between our children and death. The experience
of a colleague after the death of his father is illustrative. He had long
been expecting his father's death and bore the news with equanimity.
However, as he boarded an airplane to fly home for the funeral, he
panicked. Though he was a highly experienced traveler, he suddenly
lost faith in the plane's capacity to take off and land safely-as though
his shield against precariousness had vanished.
   The loss of a spouse often evokes the issue of basic isolation; the loss
of the significant other (sometimes the dominant other) increases one's
awareness that, try as hard as we may to go through the world two by
two, there is nonetheless a basic aloneness that we must bear. No one
can die one's own death with one or for one.
   A therapist who attends closely to a bereaved patient's associations
and dreams, will discover considerable evidence of the latter's concern
with his or her own death. For example, a patient reported this night-
mare on the night after learning that his wife had inoperable cancer:
       I was living in my old house in          . [A house that had been in the
       family for three generations.] A Frankenstein monster was chasing me
168


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
       through the house. I was terrified. The house was deteriorating, decay-
       ing. The tiles were crumbling and the roof leaking. Water leaked all over
       my mother. [His mother had died six months ago.] I fought with him. I
       had a choice of weapons. One had a curved blade with a handle, like a
       scythe. I slashed him and tossed him off the roof. He lay stretched out on
       the pavement below. But he got up and once again started chasing me
       through the house.
The patient's first association to the dream was: "I know I've got a hun-
dred thousand miles on me." The symbolism of the dream seemed
clear. His wife's impending death reminded him that his life, like his
house, was deteriorating; he was inexorably pursued by death, personi-
fied, as in his childhood, by a monster who could not be halted.
   Another patient, Tim, whose wife had terminal cancer, had this
dream the night after she, near death, had had to be hospitalized be-
cause of severe respiratory problems:
       I had just returned from some type of trip and found that I was pushed
       into some back room area. Someone had done me in. It was all filled
       with old stuffed furniture, plywood, dusty and everything was covered
       with chicken wire. There was no exit. It reminded me of Sartre's play. I
       felt stifled. I couldn't breathe, something was bearing in on me. I picked
       up some plywood box or crate that was crudely built. It hit against the
       wall or floor and had a crushed corner. That crushed corner really stuck
       out in my mind. It sort of blazed. I decided to take it up with the boss at
       the very top. I'll go right up to the top and complain. I'll go to the vice
       president. I then went up an extremely elegant stairway that had ma-
       hogany rails and marble floors. I was angry. I had been shuffled aside.
       They put it to me. Then I became confused about who I should complain
       to.
Tim's associations to the dream indicated clearly that his wife's im-
pending death hurled him into a confrontation with his own. The out-
standing image in the dream, the "blazing" crushed corner of the ply-
wood box, reminded him of the crushed body of his automobile after a
serious accident in which he had almost been killed. The plywood box
also reminded him of the plain coffin he would have to order for his
wife (according to Jewish burial ritual). In the dream it is he who finds
himself in his wife's situation. He, too, cannot breathe. He, too, is
pushed aside, trapped, crushed by something bearing down upon him.
The major affect of the dream was anger and bafflement. He felt angry
at the things happening to him, yet to whom could he issue a com-
plaint? He awoke deeply confused about who, upstairs, would be the
proper person to consult.
                                                                              169


                                                            I I DEATH
   In therapy this dream opened up important vistas. It enabled the pa-
tient, who had been previously in a panic state, to sort out his feelings
and to work on each cluster in a more meaningful way. He had been
overwhelmed with death anxiety, with which he had attempted to
cope by physically avoiding his wife and by compulsive sexuality. For
example, he masturbated several times a day in bed next to his wife (I
described this patient briefly in chapter 4). As we worked overtly on
his anxiety about his own death, he was finally able to remain near his
wife, comforting her by holding her and, in so doing, avoiding a con-
siderable measure of guilt that would have ensued after her death.
   After the death of his wife therapy focused both on the loss of his
wife and on his own existential situation which his wife's death helped
him to see more clearly. For example, he had always been achievement-
oriented but, after his wife's death, began to ask: "For whom am I
working?" "Who will see it?" Slowly Tim began to glimpse what his
wife's constant nurturing and his obsession with sex had obscured for
him: his isolation and his own finiteness. He was highly promiscuous
after his wife's death, but gradually he grew disenchanted with the
sexual chase and began to grapple with the question of what he wanted
to do in life for himself. An enormously fertile period in therapy be-
gan, and in the course of the succeeding months Tim made substantial
personal change.
   The loss of a son or daughter is often the bitterest loss of all to us and
we simultaneously mourn our child and ourselves. Life seems to hit us,
at such a time, on all fronts at once. Parents first rail at the injustice in
the universe but soon begin to understand that what seemed injustice
is, in reality, cosmic indifference. They also are reminded of the limit
of their power: there is no time in life when they have greater motiva-
tion to act and yet are helpless; they cannot protect a defenseless child.
As night follows day, the bitter lesson follows that we, in our turn, will
not be protected.
   The psychiatric grief literature does not emphasize this dynamic but
instead often focuses on the guilt (thought to be associated with uncon-
scious hostility) that parents experience at the death of a child. Richard
Gardner 10 studied parental bereavement empirically by systematically
interviewing and testing a large sample of parents whose children suf-
fered from some type of fatal illness. Though he confirmed that many
parents suffered considerable guilt, his data indicated that the guilt,
rather than emanating from "unconscious hostility," was four times
more commonly an attempt by the parent to assuage his or her own ex-
istential anxiety, to attempt to "control the uncontrollable." After all, if
170


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
one is guilty about not having done something one should have done,
then it follows that there is something that could have been done-a far
more comforting state of affairs than the hard existential facts of life.
   The loss of a child has another portentous implication for the par-
ents. It signals the failure of their major immortality project: they will
not be remembered, their seed will not take root in the future.
   Milestones. Anything that challenges the patient's permanent view
of the world can serve as a fulcrum with which the therapist can wedge
open the patient's defenses and permit him a view of life's existential
innards. Heidegger emphasizes that only when machinery suddenly
breaks down do we become aware of its functioning. 11 Only when de-
fenses against death anxiety are removed do we become fully aware of
what they shielded us from. Therefore the therapist who looks may
find existential anxiety lurking when any major event, especially an ir-
reversible one, occurs in a patient's life. Marital separation and divorce
are prime examples of such events. These experiences are so painful
that therapists often make the error of focusing attention entirely on
pain alleviation and miss the rich opportunity that reveals itself for
deeper therapeutic work.
   For some patients, the commitment to a relationship, rather than the
termination of one, acts as a boundary situation. Commitment carries
with it the connotation of finality, and many individuals cannot settle
into a permanent relationship because that would mean "this is it," no
more possibilities, no more glorious dreams of continued ascendancy.
In chapter 7 I shall discuss how irreversible decisions evoke existential
anxiety precisely because they exclude other possibilities and confront
the individual with the "impossibility of further possibility."
   The passage into adulthood is often particularly difficult. Individuals
in their late teens and early twenties are often acutely anxious about
death. In fact, a clinical syndrome in adolescents called the "terror of
life" has been described: it consists of marked hypochondriasis and
preoccupation with the aging of the body, with the rapid passage of
time, and with the inevitability of death. 12
   Therapists who treat medical residents (to take one example) some-
times note considerable existential anxiety in the thirtyish individual
who is finally completing training and must, for the first time, shed a
student identity and face the world as a grown-up. I have long ob-
served that psychiatric residents, upon nearing completion of training,
go through a period of major inner turmoil-a turmoil that has roots
reaching far below such immediate concerns as finances, selection of
an office and establishment of referral networks for private practice.
                                                                       171


                                                           I I DEATH
   Jaques, in his wonderful essay "Death and the Mid-Life Crisis,"
stresses that the individual in midlife is especially bedeviled by the
thought of deathY This is the time of life when a person may become
preoccupied with the thought, often unconscious, that he or she "has
stopped growing up and has begun to grow old." Having spent the
first half of life in the "achievement of independent adulthood," one
may reach the prime of life (Jung called age forty the "noon of life") 14
only to become acutely aware that death lies beyond. As one thirty-six-
year-old patient, who had become increasingly aware of death in his
analysis, put it: "Up till now, life has seemed an endless upward slope
with nothing but the distant horizon in view. Now suddenly I seemed
to have reached the crest of the hill, and there stretching ahead is the
downward slope with the end of the road in sight-far enough away,
it's true-but there is death observably present at the end." Jaques re-
marked upon the difficulty of working through the layers of death de-
nial and gave an example of how he helped one patient become aware
of death by analyzing his inability to mourn the death of friends.
   A threat to one's career or the fact of retirement (especially in indi-
viduals who had believed that life was an ever-ascending spiral) can be
a particularly potent catalyst for increasing one's awareness of death. A
recent study of individuals making a midlife radical career shift sug-
gests that most of them had made the decision to "drop out" or to sim-
plify their lives in the context of a confrontation with their existential
situation. 15
   Simple milestones, such as birthdays and anniversaries, can be useful
levers for the therapist. The pain elicited by these signs of the passage
of time runs deep (and for that reason is generally dealt with by reac-
tion formation, in the form of a joyous celebration). Sometimes mun-
dane reminders of aging offer an opportunity for increased existential
awareness. Even a penetrating look in the mirror can open the issue.
One patient told me that she said to herself, "I'm just a little gnome.
I'm the same little Isabelle inside, but outside I'm an old lady. I'm six-
teen going on sixty. I know it's perfectly all right for others to age, but
somehow I never thought it would happen to me." The appearance of
old people's characteristics, such as the loss of stamina or senile plaques
on the skin, stiff joints, wrinkles, balding, or even the recognition that
one enjoys "old people's" pleasures-watching, walking, serene quiet
times-may act as a spur to death awareness. The same may be said
about looking at old photographs of oneself and noting how one re-
sembles one's parents when they were considered old, or seeing
friends after long intervals and noting how they have aged. The thera-
pist who listens carefully will be able to use any of these everyday oc-
172


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
currences. Or the therapist may tactfully contrive such situations.
Freud, as I described in chapter 1, had no qualms about requesting
Fraulein Elisabeth to meditate at the site of her sister's grave.
   A careful monitoring of dreams and fantasies will invariably provide
material to increase death awareness. Every anxiety dream is a dream of
death; frightening fantasies involving such themes as unknown ag-
gressors breaking into one's home always, when explored, lead to the
fear of death. Discussions of unsettling television shows, movies, or
books may similarly lead to essential material.
   Severe illness is such an obvious catalyst that no therapist should let
this opportunity pass by unmined. Noyes studied two hundred pa-
tients who had had near-death experiences through sudden illness or
accident and found that a substantial number (25 percent) had a new
and powerful sense of death's omnipresence and nearness. One of his
subjects commented, "I used to think death would never happen or, if
it did, I would be eighty years old. But now I realize it can happen any
time, any place, no matter how you live your life. A person has a very
limited perception of death until he is confronted with it." Another de-
scribed his death awareness in these terms: "I have seen death in life's
pattern and affirmed it consciously. I am not afraid to live because I
feel that death has a part in the process of my being." Though a few of
Noyes's subjects reported an increased terror of death and a greater
sense of vulnerability, the great majority reported that their increased
death awareness had been a positive experience resulting in a greater
sense of life's preciousness and a constructive reassessment of their
life's priorities. 16
   Artificial Aids to Increase Death Awareness. Though the naturally oc-
curring reminders of death's presence are numerous, they are not,
therapists often find, sufficiently potent to combat a patient's ever-vigi-
lant denial. Consequently many therapists have sought vivid tech-
niques to bring patients to face the fact of death. In the past, intention-
al and unintentional reminders of death were far more common than
they are today. It was precisely for the purpose of reminding one of
life's transiency that a human skull was a common furnishing in a me-
dieval monk's cell. John Donne, the seventeenth-century British poet
and clergyman, wore a funeral shroud when he preached "Look to
eternity" to his congregation; and earlier, Montaigne, in his splendid
essay "That to Philosophize Is to Learn How to Die," had much to say
on the subject of intentional reminders of our finiteness:
       ... we plant our cemeteries next to churches, and in the most frequented
       parts of town, in order (says Lycurgus) to accustom the common people,
       women and children, not to grow panicky at the sight of a dead man,
                                                                           173


                                                                I I DEATH
       and so that the constant sight of bones, tombs, and funeral processions
       should remind us of our condition .... To feasts, it once was thought,
       slaughter lent added charms/Mingling with foods the sight of comba-
       tants in arms,/ And gladiators fell amid the cups, to pour/Onto the very
       tables their abundant gore .... And the Egyptians, after their feasts, had
       a large image of death shown to the guests by a man who called out to
       them: "Drink and be merry, for when you are dead you will be like
       this."
          So I have formed the habit of having death continually present, not
       merely in my imagination, but in my mouth. And there is nothing that I
       investigate so eagerly as the death of men: what words, what look, what
       bearing they maintained at that time; nor is there a place in the histories
       that I note so attentively. This shows in the abundance of my illustrative
       examples; I have indeed a particular fondness for this subject. If I were a
       maker of books, I would make a register, with comments, of various
       deaths. He who would teach men to die would teach them to live. 17
   Some therapists who have used LSD as an aid to psychotherapy spec-
ulate that an important mechanism of action is that LSD brings the pa-
tient into a dramatic confrontation with death. 18 Other therapists have
suggested that shock therapy (electrical, Metrazol, and insulin) has its
effect through a death-rebirth experience. 19
   Some encounter-group leaders have used a form of "existential
shock" therapy by asking each member to write his or her own epitaph
or obituary. "Destination" labs held for harried business executives
commonly began with this structured exercise:
       On a blank sheet of paper draw a straight line. One end of that line rep-
       resents your birth; the other end, your death. Draw a cross to represent
       where you are now. Meditate upon this for five minutes.
This short, simple exercise almost invariably evokes powerful and pro-
found reactions.
   "Calling out" is an exercise .. used in large groups to increase aware-
ness of finiteness. The members are divided into triads and assigned a
conversational task. Each individual's name is written on a slip of pa-
per, placed in a bowl, and then randomly chosen and called aloud. An
individual whose name is called stops talking and turns his back to the
others. Many participants report that, as a result of this exercise, they
have an increased awareness of the arbitrariness and the fragility of
existence.
   Some therapists and encounter-group leaders have used a guided
   • Suggested by James Bugental.
174


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
fantasy
   ~
         technique to increase death awareness. Individuals are asked to
imagine their deaths-"Where will it occur?" "When?" "How?" "De-
scribe a detailed fantasy." "Imagine your funeral." A philosophy pro-
fessor describes a number of exercises that he employs in the classroom
to increase death awareness. For example, students are requested to
write their obituaries (their "real" obituary and their "ideal" one), to
record their emotional responses to a tragic story of the death of a six-
year-old orphan, and to write the script for their own deaths. 20
   A "life cycle" group experience offered by Elliot Aronson and Ann
Dreyfus, at the National Training Laboratory summer program at Beth-
el, Maine, helped the participants to focus on the major issues in each
stage of life. In the time devoted to old age and death, these partici-
pants spent days living like old people. They were instructed to walk
old, to dress old, to powder their hair and attempt to play elderly peo-
ple they have known well. They visited a local cemetery. They walked
alone in a forest, imagined passing out, dying, being discovered by
friends, and being buried. 21
   Several death-awareness workshops have been reported that employ
structured exercises designed to provide the individual with an en-
counter with his or her death. 22 For example, W. M. Whelan describes a
workshop consisting of a single eight-hour, eight-member group ses-
sion with the following format: (1) Members complete a death anxiety
questionnaire and discuss anxiety-provoking items. (2) Members, in a
state of deep muscle relaxation, fantasize in great detail, with aware-
ness of all five senses, their own (comfortable) death. (3) Members are
asked to construct a list of their values and then asked to imagine a sit-
uation in which a life-saving nuclear fallout shelter is able to save only
a limited number of people: each member has to make an argument, on
the basis of his or her value hierarchy, why he or she should be saved
(this exercise was, according to the authors, designed to re-create
Kiibler-Ross's stage of bargaining!). (4) Again in a state of muscle relax-
ation, the members are asked to fantasize their own terminal illnesses,
their inability to communicate, and, finally, their own funerals. 23
   Interaction with the Dying. As intriguing as many of these exercises
are, they nonetheless are make-believe. Though one can be drawn into
such an exercise for a period of time, denial quickly sets in, and onere-
minds oneself that one still exists, that one is merely observing these
experiences. It was precisely because of the persistence and ubiquity of
denial to assuage dread that several years ago I started to treat individ-
uals with a fatal illness, individuals who were continually in the midst
of urgent experience and could not deny what was happening to them.
                                                                       175


                                                            I I DEATH
My hope was not only to be useful to these patients but to be able to
apply what I learned to the treatment of the physically healthy patient.
(It is difficult to phrase that sentence because the very essence of this
approach is that, from the very beginning of life, dying is a part of liv-
ing. Consequently I shall use the phrase "everyday psychotherapy"-
or better perhaps "psychotherapy of those not imminently dying.")
   Group therapy sessions with terminal patients are often p~werful
with the evocation of much affect and the sharing of much wisdom.
Many patients feel that they have learned a great deal about life but are
frustrated in their efforts to be helpful to others. One patient put it, "I
feel I have so much to teach, but my students will not listen." I have
searched for ways to expose everyday psychotherapy patients to the
wisdom and power of the dying and shall describe some limited expe-
rience with two different approaches: (1) inviting everyday psycho-
therapy patients to observe meetings of a group of terminally ill pa-
tients, and (2) introducing an individual with terminal cancer into an
everyday psychotherapy group.
   Observation of a terminal cancer group by everyday psychotherapy patients.
One patient who observed a meeting of the group of cancer patients
was Karen, whom I discussed in chapter 4. Karen's major dynamic con-
flict was her pervasive search for a dominant other-an ultimate rescu-
er-which took the form of psychic and sexual masochism. Karen
would limit herself or inflict pain on herself, if necessary, to gain the
attention and protection from some "superior" figure. The meeting she
observed was particularly powerful. One patient, Eva, announced to
the group that she had just learned she had a recurrence of cancer. She
said that she had done something that morning that she had long post-
poned: she had written a letter to her children giving instructions
about the division of minor sentimental items. In placing the letter in
her safe deposit box, she realized with a clarity she had never before at-
tained that indeed she would cease to be. As I described in chapter 4,
she realized that when her children read that letter, she would not be
there to observe or to respond to them. She wished, she said, that she
had done her work on death in her twenties rather than waiting until
now. Once one of her teachers had died (Eva was a school principal);
and, rather than concealing the death from the students, she realized
how right she had been to hold a memorial service and openly discuss
death-the death of plants, animals, pets, and humans-with the chil-
dren. Other group members, too, shared their moments of full realiza-
tions about their deaths, and some discussed the ways they had grown
as a result of that realization.
176


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
   An interesting debate developed as one member told about a neigh-
bor who had been perfectly healthy and had died suddenly during the
night. "That's the perfect death," she said. Another member disagreed
and in a few moments had presented compelling reasons that that type
of death was unfortunate: the dead woman had had no time to put her
affairs in order, to complete unfinished business, to prepare her hus-
band and her children for her death, to treasure the end of life as some
of the members in the group had learned to do. "Just the same," the
first quipped, "that's still the way I'd like to die. I've always loved
surprises!"
   Karen reacted strongly to the meeting she had observed. It was im-
mediately thereafter that she arrived at the many deep insights about
herself I described in chapter 4. For example, she realized that because
of her fear of death, she had sacrificed much of her life. She had so
feared death that she had organized her life around the search for an
ultimate rescuer; therefore she had feigned illness during her child-
hood and stayed sick in adulthood to remain near her therapist. While
observing the group, she realized with horror that she would have
been willing to have cancer in order to be in that group and sit next to
me, perhaps even hold my hand (the group ended with a hand-holding
period of meditation). When I pointed out the obvious-that is, that no
relationship is eternal, that I, as well as she, would die-she said that
she felt that she would never be alone if she could die in my arms. The
evocation and the subsequent working through of this material helped
move Karen into a new phase of therapy, especially into a consider-
ation of termination-an issue that previously she had never been will-
ing to broach.
   Another everyday therapy patient who observed the group was Su-
san, the wife of an eminent scientist who, when she was fifty, had sued
her for divorce. In her marriage she had lived a mediated existence,
serving him and basking in his accomplishments. Such a life pattern,
not uncommon among wives of successful husbands in these days, had
certain inevitable tragic consequences. First, she did not live her life; in
her effort to build up credit with the dominant other she submerged
herself, she lost sight of her wishes, her rights, and her pleasure. Sec-
ondly, because of the sacrifice of her own strivings, interests, desires,
and spontaneity, she became a less stimulating partner and was consid-
erably more at risk for divorce.
   In our work Susan passed through a deep depression and gradually
began to explore her pro-active feelings, not the reactive ones to which
she had always limited herself. She felt her anger-deep, rich, and vi-
                                                                        177


                                                                    I I DEATH
brant; she felt her sorrow-not at loss of her husband but at the loss of
herself all those years; she felt outraged at all the restrictions to which
she had consented. (For example, to ensure that her husband had opti-
mal working conditions at home, she was not permitted to watch tele-
vision, to speak on the phone, to garden while he was home-his study
looked out on the garden and her presence distracted him.) She ran the
risk of being overcome with regret for so much wasted life, and the
task of therapy was to enable her to revitalize the remainder of her life.
After two months of therapy she watched a poignant meeting of the
cancer group, was moved by the experience, and immediately plunged
into productive work which finally permitted her to understand that
the divorce might be salvation rather than requiem. After therapy she
moved to another city and several months later wrote a debriefing let-
ter which included:
       First of all, I've thought that those women with cancer need not be re-
       minded of the inevitability of death; that the awareness of death helps
       them to see things and events in their proper proportions and corrects
       our ordinarily poor sense of time. The life ahead of me may be very
       short. Life is precious, don't waste it! Make the most of every day in the
       ways you value! Reappraise your values! Check your priorities! Don't
       procrastinate! Do!
          I, for one, have wasted time. Every once in a while in the past, I'd feel
       vividly that I was only a spectator or an understudy watching the drama
       of life from the wings, but always hoping and believing that one day I'd
       be on the stage myself. Sure enough there had been times of intense liv-
        ing, but more often that not life seemed just a rehearsal for the "real"
       life ahead. But what if death comes before the "real" life has started? It would
       be tragic to realize when it's too late, that one has hardly lived at all.
   Introduction of a patient facing death into an everyday psychotherapy
group. "Death's rather like a certain kind of lecturer," wrote the nov-
elist John Fowles. "You don't really hear what is being said until you're
in the front row." 24 Some time ago I attempted to seat the seven mem-
bers (who were all everyday psychotherapy patients) of a therapy
group in the very first row by introducing into the group Charles, a pa-
tient with an incurable cancer.
   Much data exists on this experiment. I wrote a detailed summary
 after each meeting, including a review both of the narrative flow and
 of process, and mailed it to the group members (a technique I have
 used in groups for many years). 25 In addition to these summaries I have
 my own personal records of the group. Furthermore, since ten psychi-
 atric residents observed each meeting through a one-way mirror and
 discussed the meeting after each session, this group was heavily stud-
178


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
ied. From all these observations and records, I shall select and discuss
some of the most salient issues arising in the first twelve months after
Charles entered the group.
   The group was an outpatient psychotherapy one, meeting once
weekly for an hour and a half. It was an open group: as members im-
proved and graduated, new members were introduced. At the time
when Charles entered, two members had been in the group for two .
years, and four others had been there for periods of time ranging from
three to eighteen months. The age range was from twenty-seven to fif-
ty. The types of psychopathology of the members would generally be
considered neurotic or characterologic, though two members had bor-
derline traits.
   Charles was a thirty-eight-year-old divorced dentist who, three
months before consulting me, had learned that he had a form of cancer
for which there was no medical or surgical cure. In our initial inter-
view he stressed that he did not feel that he needed any help in coping
with his cancer. He had spent many days in medical libraries, familiar-
izing himself with the course, the treatment, and the prognosis of his
cancer. He arrived with a graph that he had drawn of his projected
clinical course, and had concluded that he had approximately one and
one half to three years of good, useful life ahead of him and, following
that, a rapid one-year decline. I remember having two strong impres-
sions during that initial interview. First, I marveled at his lack of mani-
fest feelings: he seemed detached-as though he were talking about
some stranger who had had the misfortune to contract a rare disease.
Secondly, though I was jarred by his isolation from feeling, I was also
struck by the fact that his detachment was serving him extraordinarily
well in this instance. He stressed that he needed no help in dealing
with his fear of death but wished assistance in getting more out of the
life remaining to him. His cancer had caused him to take stock of the
pleasures he was getting in life, and he realized that, aside from his
work, he received few important gratifications. He especially wanted
help in improving the quality of his relationship with other people. He
felt distant from others and missed the personal closeness that he per-
ceived so many others to enjoy. His relationship to a woman with
whom he had lived for three years was severely strained, and he ur-
gently wanted to be able to express, and receive, the love that existed
between them only in chrysalis.
   I had been looking for some time for a person with cancer to intro-
duce into a general psychotherapy group, and Charles looked to be the
perfect candidate. He wanted help in the very areas where the therapy
                                                                       179


                                                         !/DEATH
group can most provide it; furthermore, I suspected that he would be of
enormous assistance to others in the group. It was evident that Charles
was not in the habit of asking for help: his request was creaking and
awkward, but at the same time it was urgent and sincere and could not
be refused.
   The therapy of seven individuals interlocked in the network of a
therapy group is highly complex; and over the next twelve months a
marvelously intricate series of interpersonal and intrapersonal issues
arose, were worked upon, and occasionally were worked through. I
cannot, of course, describe all these events and shall instead place the
beacon of attention upon Charles and upon the impact he and the oth-
er members had on one another.
   To leap ahead of myself, I wish to state that the presence of an indi-
vidual facing death did not bring the therapy group down: the atmo-
sphere of the group did not become morbid, the feeling tone did not
become blackened silk or the perspective limited and fatalistic. Charles
gained a great deal from his work in the group, and in a number of
ways his situation deepened the level of discourse for each of the other
members. The group did not become monolithic but discussed the
same wide array of life issues. In fact, there were times when mass de-
nial was in operation, and for weeks on end Charles's cancer seemed
all but forgotten by the members.
   Self-disclosure is essential in psychotherapy-in group no less than
in individual therapy. At the same time it is important that the mem-
bers not experience the group as a forced confessional. Consequently,
in my orientation session with Charles before he entered the group, I
was careful to inform him (as I inform all incoming members) that to
gain help from the group he would need to be wholly honest about
both his physical condition and his psychological concerns-but that
he should be so at his own pace. Charles, accordingly, attended the
group for ten weeks before informing the group about his cancer. In
retrospect, his decision to withhold this information was wise. The
group never experienced Charles as a "cancer patient" but instead as a
person who had cancer.
   One of the basic axioms of interactional group therapy is that the
group develops into a social microcosm for each of the members. Each
person, sooner or later, begins to relate to the other members in the
group in the same manner that he relates to individuals outside the
group; each person, thus, carves out his or her own characteristic inter-
personal niche. That rapidly occurred with Charles. In his first few
meetings the group members began to note that he seemed either dis-
180


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
interested or critical and judgmental of many of their statements. They
gradually learned that he was isolated, that he had difficulty getting
close to people, that he could not experience or express his feelings,
and that he was self-critical.
   He was especially impatient and condescending to the women in the
group. He considered one a "gadfly," "childish," or on other occasions
"a lightweight" whose opinion did not matter a great deal to him. He
was impatient with another woman because of her lack of a logical
train of thought, and he generally dismissed her intuitive comments as
"interference" or as "white noise" in the system. On one occasion
when the other three men in the group were absent, Charles was al-
most entirely silent-not considering it worth his while to participate
in a totally female group. The recognition, the understanding, and the
resolution of his attitudes toward the female members were important
in helping him to understand some of the basic issues of conflict be-
tween him and the woman with whom he lived.
  Although these issues were salient to Charles's interpersonal conflict
and led him into the areas upon which he wanted to work, there re-
mained a great deal of puzzlement in the group. Periodically, over
Charles's first several meetings, members would remark that they did
not really know Charles, and that he seemed hidden, unreaL and dis-
tant to them. (Another axiom of group therapy is that when someone is
keeping an important secret, he or she tends to be globally inhibited.
The individual with the secret not only withholds the core secret but
becomes careful about traversing any avenue that might conceivably
lead to it.) Eventually, in the tenth session, the members and the thera-
pists encouraged Charles to share more of himself, and he then dis-
cussed his cancer in much the same way that he had presented it in his
pre-group individual sessions: detached, matter-of-fact, and with con-
siderable scientific detail.
  The group members responded to Charles's disclosure in highly in-
dividual fashion. Several talked about his courage and about the type
of model he provided for them. One man was especially impressed at
the way Charles talked about his goal of wanting to get as much as he
could from the life remaining to him. This patient, Dave, became aware
of how much he himself postponed life and of how little he savored
his present life.
  Two members had severe and inappropriate reactions. One, Lena
(whom I described briefly in chapter 4), had lost both parents at an ear-
ly age and had remained thereafter terrified of death. She sought for
the protection of an ultimate rescuer and remained passive, dependent,
                                                                     181


                                                           I I DEATH
and childlike. Lena, predictably, became frightened and responded in
an angry almost bizarre fashion by assuming that Charles had the same
type of cancer that had caused her mother's death and then, in a highly
inappropriate fashion, described to the group in lurid detail the debili-
tating physical changes that had occurred in her mother. The other pa-
tient, Sylvia, a forty-year-old woman with massive death anxiety, im-
mediately flared up angrily at Charles's passivity in the face of his
disease. She berated him for not having investigated other possible
sources of help: faith healers, Laetrile, Philippine psychic surgeons,
megavitamins, and so forth. When one of the other members of the
group came to Charles's rescue, a heated argument ensued. Sylvia was
so frightened by Charles's cancer that she attempted to pick a fight in
the hope that it would provide her with reasons to drop out of the
group. Throughout the year Sylvia's response to Charles continued to
be tumultuous. Her continued contact with him evoked great anxiety,
which resulted in brief decompensation and eventual salubrious reso-
lution. As Sylvia's clinical course illustrates vividly some important
principles in the management and working through of death anxiety, I
shall describe her treatment thoroughly later in this chapter.
   Over the next four weeks several important events occurred in the
group. One of the members, a pediatric nurse, described for the first
time her close relationship with one of her patients, a ten-year-old
child, who had died a few months previously. She was painfully aware
of the fact that even in the short space of ten years that child had lived
more fully than she. The death of the child in concert with Charles's
terminal illness propelled her into trying to break out of her self-im-
posed restrictions and to increase the depth of her own life.
   Another patient, Don, had been locked in a transference struggle
with me for many months. Although he felt strong yearnings for my
guidance and counsel, he felt himself defying me in a number of de-
structive ways. For example, he systematically arranged on many occa-
sions to meet each of the members of the group outside for some type
of social interaction. Although we had discussed on several occasions
the fact that this sabotaged the work of the group, Don nonetheless felt
that it was important for him to develop allies in the group against me.
After Charles revealed to the group that he had cancer, Don began to
feel quite differently toward me, and the tension and antagonism be-
tween us seemed visibly less. Don mentioned how much I had changed
over the weeks since Charles had entered the group. He stated that he
couldn't easily put it into words but then suddenly blurted out, "Some-
how I know now that you're not immortal." He was able to discuss in
182


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
detail some of his ultimate rescuer fantasies-the belief that I was infal-
lible, that I was able to plot out his future with great certainty. He was
able to express his anger at my apparent unwillingness to give him
what I was capable of giving. Charles's presence reminded Don that I,
as well as he, had to face death, that we were all united and equal in
that way, that as Emerson somewhere said, "Let us keep cool for it will
all be one in a hundred years." Suddenly his battle with me seemed
foolish and trivial, and he and I soon became allies rather than
combatants.
   Lena's relationship to Charles was extraordinarily complex. She first
found herself full of anger at him because of her anticipation of his
leaving her, as her mother and father had done. She began to recall, for
the first time, the events of her mother's death (when Lena was five)
and repeatedly relived the experience in her mind. Her mother had be-
come very emaciated before death; and during Charles's first few
months in the group after his disclosure, Lena became anorexic and
lost an alarming amount of weight. Lena's dynamics became much
clearer: she felt so overwhelmed by the death of people close to her
that she chose a state of suspended animation. Her formula was: "No
friendships, no losses." She had four aged grandparents and lived in
daily expectation of news of their death. Her dread was so great that
she deprived herself of the pleasures of knowing and being close to
them. She said once in the group, "I wish they'd all hurry up and die
and get it over with." Gradually she broke the pattern and in a poign-
ant manner allowed herself to reach out to Charles. She gingerly began
to touch him by, for example, helping him off with his coat at the be-
ginning of a meeting. Throughout, Charles remained the most impor-
tant person in the group for Lena; and by accepting the fact that the
deep pleasure she had in being close to him was worth the pain of the
eventual separation, she was gradually able to establish other impor-
tant relationships in her life. Eventually she was to profit considerably
from the group experience with Charles. During their time together in
the group she regained her lost weight, her suicidal yearnings disap-
peared, her depression lifted, and after three years of unemployment
she obtained a responsible and gratifying job.
   Another member derived another type of benefit from "sitting in the
front row." She was divorced, had two small children, and generally
felt suffused with resentment and impatience toward them. Only occa-
sionally, when one of them was injured or sick, was she able to reach
her positive tender feelings. Her relationship with Charles brought
home to her, in vivid fashion, the passage of time and the finiteness of
                                                                       183


                                                           I I DEATH
life. Gradually she was able to dip into the well of loving feelings
toward her children without provocation of illnesses, accidents, or oth-
er stark reminders of mortality.
   Although deep emotion was experienced in the group, there was
never more affect present than could be assimilated and worked
through. In large part, no doubt, this was a function of Charles's style.
He rarely showed or appeared to experience deep affect. This was
highly functional for the group work to the extent that it allowed titra-
tion of affect: emotion emerged slowly and in manageable degrees.
Eventually, however, the time came for Charles's emotion-stifling style
to come under direct surveillance. One meeting, a couple of months
after Charles's revelation to the group, is particularly illustrative.
Charles seemed pressured and began the meeting in an unusual way
by stating that he had some specific questions he wished to ask the
therapist. The questions were general, and his expectations of precise,
authoritative answers were unrealistic. He asked for some specific tech-
niques in order to overcome his distance from others, and he asked for
a specific recommendation about how to resolve a conflict with his
girlfriend. Charles posed these questions after the fashion of an effi-
cient engineer and obviously anticipated answers in kind.
   The group attempted to respond to Charles's questions, but he insist-
ed on hearing from the group leader and impatiently dismissed the
other members. They refused to be silenced, however, and shared their
feelings of hurt and annoyance at being shut out. One member gently
asked if the frantic quality of Charles's questions related to his sense of
time running out and to a need to increase the efficiency of the process
in the group. Gently, gradually, the group helped Charles talk about
what had been brewing deep inside him over the past few days. With
tears in his eyes, he revealed that he had been terribly shaken up by a
couple of events: he had watched a long television movie on the death
of a child from cancer and had, in connection with his profession as
dentist, attended a long and "gruesome" conference on oral cancer.
   With this information the group turned again to Charles's unusual
behavior in the meeting. His insistence on a precise answer to his ques-
tions from the therapist was an expression of his wish to be taken care
of. He went about it indirectly, he said, because he feared expressing
"effusive" feelings openly. If effusive, smothering sentiments were of-
fered him, he felt he would be mortified.
   Charles's initial questions were answered in the meeting, not
through "content" (that is, through specific suggestions by the thera-
pist) but through an analysis of "process" (that is, through an analysis
184


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
of his relationships to others). He learned that problems of intimacy
with others, including his ex-wife and his girlfriend, were related to
his stifling of his affect, his fear of "effusive" sentiments by others, his
judgmentalism and dismissal of peers in the hopes of getting a systems-
oriented solution from authority.
  A few weeks later a similar episode occurred that corroborated and
reinforced this instruction for Charles. He started the meeting in an ob-
viously belligerent way. He was often upset by the amount of alimony
he had to pay, and he remarked on a newspaper article that day dem-
onstrating how women and divorce lawyers were exploiting helpless
men. He then extended these remarks to the women in the group and
in general belittled their contributions. When the group, once again,
explored what had been happening to him, Charles described some
highly emotional events of the last two days. His only child had just
left home for college, and their last day together had been disappoint-
ing to Charles. He had so much wanted to tell his son how much he
loved him. Yet they passed their last meal together in silence, and
Charles felt despair at having lost this precious opportunity. Since his
son's departure Charles had been preoccupied with "what's next?,"
with "everything seems terminal," and he felt that he was entering
into a new, and final, phase of life. He did not fear death or pain,
Charles said; what he really feared was disability and helplessness.
  Obviously everyone shared Charles's fear of disability and helpless-
ness; yet it had a particular terror for Charles whose dread of helpless-
ness was evident in his reluctance to reveal vulnerability or to ask for
help. In this particular meeting, rather than come to the group with an
open description of his pain and a request for help, Charles had begun
with a belligerent, distancing manner. His cancer would one day ren-
der him physically dependent on others, and he lived in dread of that
day. Gradually the group helped allay that dread by, on numerous oc-
casions, affording him the opportunity to disclose his feelings of vul-
nerability and to request help from the others.
  One of the members of the group, Ron, who had been in the group
for over two years, was obviously well enough to graduate and had
been deliberating termination for some time. Furthermore, he was ro-
mantically involved with Irene, one of the female members; and as
long as he was present, she found it difficult to make good use of the
group. Whenever members of a therapy group form a subgroup or
dyad and develop an allegiance to that subgroup which surpasses in
importance their dedication to the primary task of the large therapy
group, then therapeutic work becomes seriously impaired. This point
                                                                        185


                                                          I I DEATH
had been reached with Ron and Irene; and at one meeting I not only
supported Ron's decision to terminate the group but urged him to do
so in such a forthright manner that it hastened his decision to termi-
nate. The meeting after Ron's departure was tumultuous. Another axi-
om of small therapy groups is that members of a group who are ex-
posed to a common stimulus will have highly individual responses to
that stimulus. There can only be one possible explanation for this phe-
nomenon: each of the members has a different internal world. Thus the
investigation of varying responses to the same stimulus often provides
a high yield in therapy.
  The responses of Sylvia and Lena were especially striking. Both were
extraordinarily threatened. They believed that I had kicked Ron out of
the group-a view that was not held by the other members. Further-
more, they saw my decision as extremely arbitrary and unfair. They
were angry; yet they feared to express their anger lest they, too, be
thrown out of the group.
  The work done on these feelings led into an investigation of Sylvia's
and Lena's major defensive structures-a belief in deliverance by an ul-
timate rescuer. Both were so terrified of being abandoned by me that
they took great pains to appease and placate me. In order to stay near
me, they both, at an unconscious level, resisted getting well and, at a
conscious level, declined to report to the group any change that might
be construed as positive. Charles's presence in the group brought much
closer to the fore their fears of abandonment and, beneath that, of
death. Both Lena and Sylvia gradually realized that they had overreact-
ed to the situation-that Ron's departure was the proper decision for
Ron and for the group, and that no one else felt fearful about being
thrown out of the group. Eventually they understood that their reac-
tion to this incident was reflective of their general behavior, of their
dependency, their fear of abandonment, and their self-crippling
tendencies.
   Charles's reaction to Ron's leaving was also very strong, as was his lat-
er reaction to other members in the group preparing to terminate. He
said that it actually provoked a physical pain right in the middle of his
chest. It was as though something were being wrenched away from
him, and he felt extremely threatened at the possible dissolution of the
group. In one meeting Charles-the same Charles who a few months
previously had said that he was sterile emotionally, and that no one
meant anything to him-told the group how much they meant to him
and, with tears streaming down his face, thanked them for, as he put it,
saving his life.
   On one occasion a young man in the group made the curious state-
186


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
ment that he envied Charles for having a fatal illness; if he, too, had a
fatal illness, he might be plunged into making something more of his
life. The group was quick to remind the young man he did indeed have
a fatal illness, and that the difference between Charles and the others
was simply the difference between sitting in the front, rather than in
the back, row. Frequently Charles attempted to bring that point home
to the others in the group. On one memorable occasion one of the older
members lamented that he had "wasted" his life: there had been so
many missed opportunities, so many undeveloped potential friend-
ships, so many untapped career possibilities. He was full of self-pity
and avoided experiencing the present by a remorseful trudging about
in the past. Charles was especially effective by pointing out forcefully
to him that while he had not wasted his life, he was at that very mo-
ment in the process of "wasting" it.
   The group members would from time to time suddenly be reminded
that Charles had cancer and was going to die in the not too distant fu-
ture. Periodically each was thrown into a confrontation with Charles's
death and his or her own as well. One member who had always denied
death commented that Charles's hunger for life, his courage, and his
mode of dealing with his death had given her strength and a model for
both living and dying.
   At the time of this writing Charles continues to be an active member
of the group. He has long outlived his prognosis and is in good phys-
ical condition. Moreover, he has achieved his original goals in therapy.
He feels more human and is no longer isolated: he relates far more
openly and intimately with others. He entered couples' therapy with
his girlfriend; and his relationship to her vastly improved. His pres-
ence in the group has touched almost all the members in profound
ways; their experience with Charles shifted each of them from a preoc-
cupation with a relatively narrow band of existence toward a desire to
plunge into life in all its breadth and intensity.
                Death as a Primary Source of Anxiety
The concept of death provides the psychotherapist with two major
forms of leverage. I have discussed the first: that death is of such mo-
mentous importance that it can, if properly confronted, alter one's life
perspective and promote a truly authentic immersion in life. The sec-
                                                                      187


                                                           !/DEATH
ond, to which I shall now turn my attention, is based on the premise
that the fear of death constitutes a primary source of anxiety, that it is
present early in life, is instrumental in shaping character structure, and
continues throughout life to generate anxiety that results in manifest
distress and in the erection of psychological defenses.
   First, some general therapeutic principles. It is important to keep in
mind that death anxiety, though it is ubiquitous and has pervasive
ramifications, exists at the deepest levels of being, is heavily repressed,
and is rarely experienced in its full sense. Death anxiety per se is not
easily evident in the clinical picture of most patients; nor does it often
become an explicit theme in the therapy, especially not in brief ther-
apy, of most patients. Some patients are, however, suffused with overt
death anxiety from the very onset of therapy. There are also life situa-
tions in which the patient has such a rush of death anxiety that the
therapist, try as he or she might, cannot evade the issue. Furthermore,
in long-term intensive therapy which explores deep levels of concern,
explicit death anxiety is always to be found and must be considered in
the therapeutic process.
   Since death anxiety is so intimately tied to existence, it has a differ-
ent connotation from "anxiety" in other frames of reference. Though
the existential therapist hopes to alleviate crippling levels of anxiety,
he or she does not hope to eliminate anxiety. Life cannot be lived nor
can death be faced without anxiety. Anxiety is guide as well as enemy
and can point the way to authentic existence. The task of the therapist
is to reduce anxiety to comfortable levels and then to use this existing
anxiety to increase a patient's awareness and vitality.
   Another major point to keep in mind is that, even though death anxi-
ety may not explicitly enter the therapeutic dialogue, a theory of anxi-
ety based on death awareness provides the therapist with a frame of
reference, an explanatory system, that may greatly enhance his or her
effectiveness.
REPRESSION OF DEATH ANXIETY
   In chapter 2 I described a head-on automobile collision where, had
circumstances been less fortunate, I would have lost my life. My re-
sponse to that accident serves as a transparent model for the workings
of death anxiety in neurotic reactions. Recall that within a day or two I
no longer experienced any explicit death anxiety but instead noted a
specific phobia surrounding luncheon discussions. What happened
was that I "handled" death anxiety by repression and displacement. I
bound anxiety to a specific situation. Rather than being fearful of death
188


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
or of nothingness, I became anxious about something. Anxiety is al-
ways ameliorated by becoming attached to a specific object or situation.
Anxiety attempts to become fear. Fear is fear of some thing; it has a lo-
cation in time and space; and, because it can be located, it can be toler-
ated and even "managed" (one may avoid the object or develop some
systematic plan of conquering one's fear); fear is a current sweeping
over one's surface-it does not threaten one's foundation.
   I believe that this course of events is not uncommon. Death anxiety
is deeply repressed and not part of our everyday experience. Gregory
Zilboorg, in speaking of the fear of death, said: "If this fear were con-
stantly conscious, we should be unable to function normally. It must be
properly repressed to keep us living with any modicum of comfort." 26
   No doubt the repression, and subsequent invisibility, of death anxi-
ety is the reason that many therapists neglect its role in their work. But
surely the same state of affairs applies to other theoretical systems. The
therapist always works with tracings of and defenses against primal
anxiety. How often, for example, does an analytically oriented thera-
pist encounter explicit castration anxiety? Another source of confusion
is that the fear of death can be experienced at many different levels.
One may, for example, consider death dispassionately and intellectual-
ly. Yet this adult perception is by no means the same as the dread of
death that resides in the unconscious, a dread that is formed early in
life at a time prior to the development of precise conceptual formula-
tion, a dread that is terrible and, inchoate and exists outside of lan-
guage and image. The original unconscious nucleus of death anxiety is
made more terrifying yet by the accretion of a young child's horrible
misconceptions of death.
   As a result of repression and transformation, existential therapy
deals with anxiety that seems to have no existential referent. Later in
this chapter I shall discuss patients who have much overt death anxiety
and also how layers of explicit death anxiety must always be reached
through long and intensive therapy. But even in those courses of ther-
apy where death anxiety never becomes explicit, the paradigm based
on death anxiety may enhance the therapist's effectiveness.
   The Therapist Is Provided with a Frame of Reference That Greatly Enhances
His or Her Effectiveness. As nature abhors a vacuum, we humans abhor
uncertainty. One of the tasks of the therapist is to increase the patient's
sense of certainty and mastery. It is a matter of no small importance
that one be able to explain and order the events in our lives into some
coherent and predictable pattern. To name something, to locate its
place in a causal sequence, is to begin to experience it as under our con-
                                                                        189


                                                            I I DEATH
trol. No longer, then, is our internal experience or behavior frighten-
ing, alien or out of control; instead, we behave (or have a particular in-
ner experience) because of something we can name or identify. The
"because" offers one mastery (or a sense of mastery that phenomeno-
logically is tantamount to mastery). I believe that the sense of potency
that flows from understanding occurs even in the matter of our basic
existential situation: each of us feels less futile, less helpless, and less
alone, even when, ironically, what we come to understand is the fact
that each of us is basically helpless and alone in the face of cosmic
indifference.
   In the previous chapter I presented an explanatory system of psycho-
pathology based on death anxiety. The importance of such an explana-
tory system is as important for the therapist as it is for the patient. Ev-
ery therapist uses an explanatory system-some ideological frame of
reference-to organize the clinical material with which he or she is
faced. Even if the therapist's explanatory system is so complex and ab-
stract and so rooted in unconscious structures that it cannot be explicit-
ly transmitted to the patient, it nonetheless enhances the therapist's ef-
fectiveness in numerous ways.
   First, a belief system provides therapists with a sense of security for
the same reasons that explanation is useful to patients. By allowing the
therapist to control, and not be overwhelmed by, a patient's clinical
material, a belief system enhances a therapist's self-confidence and
sense of mastery and results in the patient's developing trust and confi-
dence in the therapist-an essential condition for treatment. Further-
more, a therapist's belief system often serves to augment his or her in-
terest in a patient-an interest that vastly facilitates the development
of the necessary therapist-patient relationship. For example, I believe
that the search for a genetic causal explanation (that is, "Why from the
standpoint of a patient's past history is that patient the way he or she
is?") is a wrong steer in the therapeutic process; nevertheles&, the ex-
planation of the past often serves an important function in therapy: it
provides therapist and patient with a joint, purposeful project, an intel-
lectual bone to gnaw upon, which brings them together and keeps
them cemented to one another while the real agent of change, the
therapeutic relationship, germinates and matures.
   The therapist's belief system provides consistency to his or her re-
marks to patients: it permits the therapist to know what to explore and
what not to push, so that he or she does not confuse a patient. Even if
the therapist does not make full and explicit interpretations about the
unconscious roots of a patient's problems, the therapist may still, with
190


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
subtlety and good timing, make comments that, at a deep unspoken
level, "click" with the patient's unconscious and allow the latter to feel
completely understood. A belief system that is deeply rooted, ground-
ed in fact in the deepest levels of being, has the particular advantage of
conveying to the patient that there are no taboo areas, that any topic
may be discussed, and, furthermore, that his deepest concerns are not
idiosyncratic but are shared by all human beings.
   The therapist's sense of certainty issuing from an explanatory system
of psychopathology has a benefit for therapy which is curvilinear in
nature. There is an optimal amount of therapist certainty: too little and
too much are counterproductive. Too little certainty, for reasons al-
ready discussed, retards the formation of the necessary level of trust.
Too much certainty, on the other hand, becomes rigidity. The therapist
rejects or distorts data that will not fit into his system; furthermore, the
therapist avoids facing, and helping the patient to face, one of the core
concepts in existential therapy-that uncertainty exists, and that all of
us must learn to coexist with it.
INTERPRETATIVE OPTIONS: AN ILLUSTRATIVE CASE STUDY
   In chapter 4 I described some general existential dynamics underly-
ing common clinical syndromes involving death anxiety, I shall pre-
sent here specific interpretative options in a case of compulsive
sexuality.
   Bruce was a middle-aged male and had since adolescence been con-
tinually, as he put it, "on the prowl." He had had sexual intercourse
with hundreds of women but had never cared deeply for any one of
them. Bruce did not relate to a woman as to a whole person but as a
"piece of ass." The women were more or less interchangeable. The im-
portant thing was bedding a woman-but, once orgasm was reached,
he had no particular desire to remain with her. It was not unusual,
therefore, once a woman had left, for him to go out searching for an-
other, sometimes only minutes later. The compulsive quality of his be-
havior was so clear that it was evident even to him. He was aware often
of "needing" or "having" to pursue a woman when he did not wish to.
   Now Bruce could be understood from many perspectives, none of
which had exclusive hegemony. The oedipal overtones were clearly
evident: he desired but feared women who resembled his mother. He
was usually impotent with his wife. The closer he came in his travels to
the city his mother inhabited, the stronger was his sexual desire. Fur-
thermore, his dreams groaned with incestuous and castration themes.
There was also evidence that his compulsive heterosexuality was
                                                                         191


                                                           I I DEATH
powered by the need to handle the eruption of unconscious homosex-
ual impulses. Bruce's self-esteem was severely impaired, and the suc-
cessful seduction of women could be understood as an attempt to bol-
ster his self-worth. Still another perspective: Bruce had both a need and
a fear of closeness. The sexual encounter, at once closeness and carica-
ture of closeness, honored both the need and the fear.
   During more than eight years of analysis and several courses of ther-
apy with competent therapists, all of these explanations, and many oth-
ers besides, were explored fully, but without effect on his compulsive
sexual drive.
   During my work with Bruce I was struck by the rich, unmined exis-
tential themes. Bruce's compulsivity could be understood as a shield
against confrontation with, his existential situation. For example, it was
apparent that Bruce was fearful of being alone. Whenever he was away
from his family, Bruce took great pains to avoid spending an evening
alone.
  Anxiety can be a useful guide, and there are times when the thera-
pist and patient must openly court anxiety. Accordingly, when Bruce
had increased his ability to tolerate anxiety, I suggested that he spend
an evening entirely alone and record his thoughts and feelings. What
transpired that night was exceedingly important in his therapy. Raw
terror is the best term for the experience. He encountered, for the first
time since childhood, his fear of the supernatural. By sheer chance
there was a brief power failure and Bruce grew terrified of the dark. He
imagined that he saw a dead woman lying on the bed (resembling the
old woman in the film The Exorcist); he imagined he saw a death's head
in the window; he feared that he might be touched by "something,
perhaps a hand of a skeleton all dressed in rags." He gained enormous
relief from the presence of a dog and for the first time realized the
strong bond between some individuals and their pets: "What is need-
ed," he said, "is not necessarily a human companion but something
alive near you."
   The terror of that evening was gradually, through the work of ther-
apy, transformed into insight. Spending an evening alone made the
function of sex abundantly clear. Without the protection of sex Bruce
encountered massive death anxiety: the images were vivid-a dead
woman, a skeleton's hand, a death's head. How did sex protect Bruce
from death? Through a number of ways, each of which we analyzed in
therapy. Sexual compulsivity, like every symptom, is overdetermined.
For one thing sex was a form of death defiance. There was something
frightening about sex for Bruce; no doubt sex was deeply entangled
192


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
with buried incestuous yearnings and with fears of retaliatory castra-
tion-and by "castration" I mean not literal castration but annihilation.
Thus the sexual act was counterphobic. Bruce stayed alive by jamming
his penis into the vortex of life. Viewed in this way, Bruce's sexual
compulsivity dovetailed with his other passions-parachuting, rock
climbing, and motorcycling.
   Sex also defeated death by reinforcing Bruce's belief in his personal
specialness. Bruce stayed alive, in one sense, by being the center of his
universe. Women revolved about him. All over the world women
adored him. They existed for him alone. Bruce never thought of them
as having independent lives. He imagined they remained in suspended
animation for him; that, like Joseph K.'s flagellators in Kafka's The Tri-
al, they were there for him every time he opened their doors, and that
they froze into immobility when he did not call upon them. And of
course sex served the function of preventing the conditions necessary
for a true confrontation with death. Bruce never had to face the isola-
tion that accompanies the awareness of one's personal death. Women
were "something alive and near," much like the dog on the night of
his terror. Bruce was never alone, he was always in the midst of coitus
(a frenetic effort to fuse with a woman), searching for a woman, or just
having left a woman. Thus, his search for a woman was not truly a
search for sex, nor even a search powered by infantile forces, by "the
stuff from which" as Freud liked to say "sex will come," 27 but instead it
was a search to enable Bruce to deny and to assuage his fear of death.
   Later in therapy an opportunity arose for him to go to bed with a
beautiful woman who was the wife of his immediate boss. He deliber-
ated about this chance and discussed it with a friend who counseled
him against taking 'it because it might have destructive ramifications.
Bruce also knew that the toll he would have to pay in anxiety and guilt
would be prohibitive. Finally with a mighty wrench he, for the first
time in his life, decided to forgo the sexual conquest. In our next ther-
apy hour I agreed with him that he was acting indeed in his best
interests.
   His reaction to his decision was enlightening. He accused me of tak-
ing his life's pleasures away from him. He felt "done for," "finished."
The following day, at a time when he could have had a sexual assigna-
tion, he read a book and sunbathed. "This is what Yalom wanted," he
thought, "for me to grow old, sit in the sun and bleach like an old dog
turd." He felt lifeless and depressed. That night he had a dream that il-
luminates better than any dream I have known the use of dream
symbolism:
                                                                      193


                                                               I I DEATH
      I had a beautiful bow and arrow, I was proclaiming it as a great work of
      art that possessed magical qualities. You and X [a friend] differed and
      pointed out that it was just a very ordinary bow and arrow. I said, "No,
      it's magic, look at those features, and these!" [pointing at two protuber-
      ances]. You said, "No, it's very ordinary." And you proceeded to demon-
      strate to me how simply the bow was constructed, how simple twigs and
      bindings accounted for its shape.
   What Bruce's dream illustrates so beautifully is another way that sex
is death defeating. Death is connected with banality and ordinariness.
The role of magic is to allow one to transcend the laws of nature, to
transcend the ordinary, to deny one's creaturely identity-an identity
that condemns one to biological death. His phallus was an enchanted
bow and arrow, a magic wand lifting him above natural law. Each af-
fair magically constituted a mini-life; although each of his affairs was a
maze ending in a cul-de-sac, his affairs, all of them taken together, pro-
vided him with the illusion of a constantly lengthening life line.
   As we worked through the material generated by his taking these
two stands-spending time alone and not accepting a sexual invita-
tion-a great deal of insight ensued to illuminate not only his sexual
pathology but many other aspects of his life. For example, he had al-
ways related to others in a highly limited, sexual way. When his sexual
compulsiveness waned, he began for the first time to confront the
question, What are people for?-a question that launched a valuable
exploration of Bruce's confrontation with existential isolation. I shall
discuss this phase of Bruce's therapy in chapter 9. Indeed, Bruce's
course of therapy illustrates the interdependence of all the ultimate
concerns. Bruce's decision, and his subsequent reluctance to accept that
decision, to pass up a sexual invitation was the tip of the iceberg of an-
other extraordinarily important existential concern, freedom, and espe-
cially of the issue of assuming responsibility-the theme of chapter 6.
Lastly, Bruce's eventual relinquishment of his sexual compulsion con-
fronted him with another ultimate concern-meaninglessness. With
the removal of his major raison d'etre, Bruce began to confront the prob-
lem of purpose in life-the subject of chapter 9.
 DEATH ANXIETY IN LONG-TERM THERAPY
   Though brief courses of therapy often entirely circumvent any ex-
plicit consideration of death anxiety, any long-term intensive therapy
will be incomplete without working through awareness and fear of
death. As long as a patient continues to attempt to ward off death
 through an infantile belief that the therapist will deliver him or her
194


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
from it, then the patient will not leave the therapist. "As long as I am
with you, I will not die" is the unspoken refrain that so often emerges
in late stages of therapy.
   May Stern, in an important article, describes six patients mired in an
interminable analysis. 28 In each instance the working through of death
anxiety brought the analysis to a successful conclusion. One represen-
tative patient was a thirty-eight-year-old obsessive-compulsive male
with symptoms of insomnia, nightmares, hypochondriasis, and the ob-
sessive fantasy occurring in sexual relations that he was being sat upon
and breathed into. Much analytic work had been done on oedipal and
preoedipal levels. The meaning of his symptoms in terms of castration
anxiety, incestuous feminine identification, pregenital regression, oral
incorporation, and so forth had been explored, but without therapeutic
effect. Only when the analyst moved to a deeper level-the meaning of
his symptoms in the context of death fear-did the clinical picture
alter.
       Finally, transference material referring to a wish to get from the analyst
       a magical formula elicited the interpretation that he conceived of analy-
       sis as protection against fear of death, and that no one was able to protect
       him against inevitable death. This interpretation effected a surprising,
       almost dramatic turn. It brought into analysis his permanent fears of dy-
       ing manifested in his hypochondriacal complaints, his desperate strug-
       gle with the fear of nothingness in the beginning of his latency period,
       and his wish to stay forever in analysis.
   Another patient who had many self-destructive symptoms-gam-
bling, drinking, continual quarreling, and masochistic sexual trends-
also had had little success in a lengthy analysis.
       In analysis, no technical device was able to make him give up acting out
       the fantasy that by his perverse activities he would arouse the anger of
       the analyst, which to him meant being beaten. Any interpretation by the
       analyst was used for gratification of his wish to be scolded and beaten;
       silence was interpreted as the sullen response of the angered father. His
       analysis seemed to have reached an impasse .... Finally, the therapist in-
       terpreted that through fusion with the analyst (father}, he wanted to win
       protection against death. This interpretation brought out a wealth of ma-
       terial hitherto withheld. "Death is and always was around me." He re-
       membered having thought a lot about death as a child. "I have solved
       my fear of death through submission .... Being raped anally is protec-
       tion against death." He resented that this had not been pointed out to
       him earlier.
   In this case, as in the first, the working through of transference was
the via regia to the subterranean layers of death anxiety. The historical
                                                                               195


                                                                I I DEATH
view of transference (that is, the transfer of affect from some prior
cathexis to a current one) is of only limited value in the actual process
of therapy. What is important is the immediate, here-and-now function
of the patient's distortion. Stern's patient learned that he used the
therapist as a shield against current death awareness and fear. Gradual-
ly he confronted his death and grew to understand that not only his
transference but his symptoms, too, represented infantile magical ways
of warding off death (for example, drinking represented "symbolic ec-
static fusion with mother as a defense against death").
   Each of these patients underwent subsequent marked improvement,
but the author was careful to note that "the dramatic turn in the treat-
ment situation of these patients might be due to the fact that the inter-
pretation of fear of death was introduced after years of tedious working
through, after a possible termination of the analysis had appeared on
the horizon." In every neurotic individual there is a substratum of
death anxiety, which can be worked through in extensive therapy-a
process that the therapist facilitates by interpreting both the patient's
symptoms and the transference as an attempt to cope with death.
   Death cannot be ignored in an extensive venture of self-exploration,
because a major task of the mature adult is to come to terms with the re-
ality of decline and diminishment. The Divine Comedy, which Dante
wrote in his late thirties, may be understood on many allegorical lev-
els, but certainly it reflects its author's concern about his personal
death. The opening verses describe the fearful confrontation with
one's own mortality that frequently occurs in midlife.
       In the middle of the course of our life, I came to myself within a dark
       wood, having lost the direct way. Ah, how difficult it is to describe what
       that wood was like, thick and savage and harsh, just the thought of
       which renews my fear! 9
   Individuals who have had significant emotional distress in their
lives, and whose neurotic defenses have resulted in self-restriction,
may encounter exceptionally severe difficulty in midlife, the time
when aging and impending death must be recognized. The therapist
who treats a patient in midlife must remind himself or herself that
much psychopathology emanates from death anxiety. Jaques, in his es-
say on the midlife crisis, states this clearly:
       A person who reaches mid-life, either without having successfully estab-
       lished himself in marital and occupation().! life, or having established
       himself by means of manic activity and denial with consequent emotion-
       al impoverishment, is badly prepared for meeting the demands of mid-
       dle age, and getting enjoyment out of his maturity. In such cases, the
196


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
       mid-life crisis, and the adult encounter with the conception of life to be
       lived in the setting of an approaching personal death, will likely be ex-
       perienced as a period of psychological disturbance and depressive break-
       down. Or breakdown may be avoided by means of a strengthening of
       manic defenses, with a warding off of depression and persecution about
       aging and death, but with an accumulation of persecutory anxiety to be
       faced when the inevitability of aging and death eventually demands
       recognition.
          The compulsive attempts, in many men and women reaching middle
       age, to remain young, the hypochondriacal concern over health and ap-
       pearance, the emergence of sexual promiscuity in order to prove youth
       and potency, the hollowness and lack of genuine enjoyment of life, and
       the frequency of religious concern are familiar patterns. They are at-
       tempts at a race against time. 30
DEATH ANXIETY AS A MAJOR SYMPTOM: A CASE STUDY
   Often therapists encounter patients for whom death anxiety plays so
central and explicit a role that no inferential leaps are needed. These
patients are often trying, because their therapists, once they realize that
there is no getting around the issue of death, become uncomfortably
aware that they have no conceptual tools to guide them in their work.
   Such a patient was Sylvia, who was mentioned earlier in this chapter
as a member of the therapy group into which Charles, the patient
with advanced cancer, was introduced. Sylvia was a divorced, thirty-
six-year-old wealthy architect who had been in psychotherapy on and
off over the previous ten years. She was alcoholic, chronically de-
pressed, anxious, obese, lonely, and subject to a wide variety of psycho-
physiological complaints, including headaches, urticaria, back pain,
hearing difficulties, and asthma. She was involved in a severe conflict
with her thirteen-year-old daughter and with two older children who,
because of her alcoholism and unpredictable behavior, had elected to
live with their father. Her previous therapy (individual, group, and
family formats) had effected little improvement. A year and a half of
therapy in a specialized group for alcoholics had helped Sylvia gain
some control over her drinking. In most other ways, though, she re-
mained on a plateau of stress; and therapy was merely a "holding
operation."
   Charles's entrance into the therapy group (where she had been a
member for several months) radically altered the course of her therapy.
It forcibly confronted her with the idea of death; and some important
themes hitherto overlooked emerged in her clinical picture.
   Sylvia's first reaction when Charles informed the group that he had
incurable cancer was irrational. Earlier I described her strong anger at
him for passively giving in to cancer and not seeking other than con-
                                                                             197


                                                           I I DEATH
ventional medical modes of help. A couple of weeks after Charles had
informed the group about his cancer, Sylvia had a panic reaction. She
had bought a new leather sofa for her home but was strangely dis-
tressed by its smell. Furthermore she had a house guest who was an art-
ist, and she became convinced that the fumes from the oil paints were
toxic. That evening she developed a slight rash on her face and in the
middle of the night woke up in severe panic, convinced that she was
going to die as a result of respiratory failure caused by an allergic reac-
tion to the sofa and to the paint fumes. She grew more and more fright-
ened and finally called an ambulance in the middle of the night. She
began drinking again and, three weeks after Charles's entrance, was ar-
rested for drunken driving. She stated that her driving was a form of
suicide; she felt that suicide was a mode of achieving some mastery
over death because it gives one an active control of one's fate rather
than waiting for "something horrible to engulf you." Her anxiety level
continued high for several weeks, and she was so uncomfortable that
she raised the question of leaving the therapy group. At the same time
she developed the conviction that "her number was up in the group,"
and that I was trying to get rid of her. When, because of her continued
headaches, I referred her to an internist for a physical examination, she
went into an acute depression and interpreted this referral as my say-
ing to her that I refused to take care of her any more and was sending
her to someone else. When new people were introduced into the group,
she was convinced that they were being brought in to replace her.
   After her initial anxiety subsided, Sylvia stopped avoiding Charles
and began to make contact with him, at first in a tentative and then in a
much more positive manner. There were meetings in which Charles was
depressed or anxious, and it was Sylvia who, of all the members, found
the courage to wonder aloud whether Charles was concerned about his
cancer or about time running out. Gradually Sylvia began thinking and
talking more about some of her central concerns: aging, her fear of get-
ting cancer, her dread of loneliness. She became preoccupied with her
mother's death and began thinking about the events around it with
greater detail and more intensity than she had for the last fifteen years.
These themes had always been present; yet they had never been for-
mally worked on in her therapy.
   Sylvia's case provides wonderful proof of how the therapist's frame
of reference controls the content of the material provided by the pa-
tient. For example, Sylvia had had severe insomnia for fifteen years
and had been treated by many clinicians with a variety of approaches
and a vast number of sedatives. A few weeks after Charles entered the
198


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
group, she again described her intractable insomnia but this time, be-
cause the therapist was tuned to a different channeL she added the in-
formation that for years she had awakened virtually every night be-
tween 2:00 and 4:00A.M. in a sweat, saying to herself, "I don't want to
die, I don't want to die." In her previous ten years of therapy (includ-
ing two years with me) she had never told that to a therapist!
   When I invoked death anxiety as a central organizing principle,
many disparate symptoms and events fell into a coherent pattern. Syl-
via's panic attacks, which often initiated eating and drinking binges,
were almost invariably precipitated by some type of insult to her body,
some suggestion of physical illness or deterioration. Sylvia's death
anxiety was always greatest when she was alone. The implicit message
she delivered to her thirteen-year-old daughter was "Don't grow up
and leave me. I can't bear to be alone. I need you to stay as young as
you are and to remain with me. If you don't grow up, I won't grow
older." This message seriously affected her daughter, who displayed
severe delinquent behavior.
   Sylvia's chief mechanism of defense against her anxiety was her be-
lief in the existence of an ultimate rescuer, a belief that lay at the root
of her pervasive orality (manifested in part by her alcoholism and obe-
sity) and was particularly evident in her relationship toward therapy
and her therapists. She was perpetually obsequious and deferential to
them. She feared nothing more than the possibility of being rejected or
abandoned by them. To this end she exaggerated her needfulness, con-
cealed any positive gains that she made, and often presented herself as
exaggeratedly confused and helpless. Her task in therapy was, it
seemed, to present herself, through a number of strategies, as so enfee-
bled that the therapist would be forced to take her in hand and give
her succor.
   The more Sylvia confronted these issues, the higher her anxiety
mounted. Soon she was so uncomfortable that she needed to be seen
more frequently than once a week in the group meeting. I saw her for a
series of individual sessions in which we did a focal analysis of her
death concerns.
   The death of her mother had been the most painful event of Sylvia's
life, and she could not think about it without horror. Her mother had
developed cancer of the cervix, and at the age of twenty-five, Sylvia
left her family, flew to her mother's bedside, and nursed her for the
last month of her life. Her mother at this point was either unconscious
or in a highly irrational state of consciousness, where she was halluci-
natory and very paranoid. Without bladder or bowel controL her moth-
                                                                        199


                                                          I I DEATH
er needed Sylvia's continual nursing. Finally, in the mist of excrement
and overwhelming stench, with gurgling sounds in her throat and
with blood and mucous running out of her mouth, her mother died.
Sylvia remembers feeling at that time that her head was disconnected
from her body, that it was swelling and would split apart (similar to
the headaches she experienced after Charles entered the group).
   Sylvia has many frightening childhood memories about death. Her
grandfather had died when she was seven, and her grandmother six
months later. She remembers seeing her grandmother in the casket and
remembers her conviction that they had cut her grandmother's throat.
(In retrospect, she thinks her grandmother had had thyroid surgery.)
When she was twelve a schoolmate drowned, and she went to his.fu-
neral-also a very frightening experience for her.
   Sylvia herself had been a sickly child and was told on many occa-
sions by her mother (and recalls her mother telling friends and rela-
tives) how close she had come to dying when young. She had several
bouts with pneumonia in the first five years of her life. At the age of
six she had a broken arm and chronic osteomyelitis. She required sur-
gery at that time and remembers with great dread the suffocating ether
cone. Ever since then she had had severe anxiety with anesthesia. Dur-
ing the birth of each of her children the anesthesia evoked so much
death anxiety that she had brief psychotic episodes.
   Her earliest memory is of "being dead" as a very young child, and of
an aunt massaging her legs, perhaps trying to bring her back to life.
She thinks she may have been in a coma and remembers that her aunt
was crying. She also remembers that every time her body was touched,
she felt intense pain but could not speak or communicate in any other
way to ask her aunt to stop massaging her. A second early memory is a
recollection of being dead and floating out of her body and trying des-
perately, but in vain, to rejoin it.
   In addition to these early sensitizing experiences, which exposed her
to death "too much and too soon," several other important factors in
Sylvia's life prevented her from building traditional defenses against
death terror. She had no sense of reliance on either her mother or her
father. Her father deserted the family when she was a young child, and
her recollection of her mother is that she was undependable and irre-
sponsible. Her mother panicked at any sickness or physical injury and
called in some other member of the family to do the necessary nursing
if anyone was ill. Her mother had not been available to her emotional-
ly or physically: even when Sylvia was a preadolescent, the mother left
home, presumably with a man, for days on end, leaving the family en-
tirely in Sylvia's care. Her mother faced her own death with unrelent-
200


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
ing terror and provided Sylvia with a model that sensitized her even
more to a fear of death. (Many patients report that their parents' mode
of facing death is extremely important in shaping their own attitudes
toward death. There are, in this observation, some obvious implications
for the treatment of the dying patient: one way to maintain meaning in
life until the very end is to consider the model one sets for others.)
   Sylvia's death anxiety was obviously overdetermined. Not only had
she had too much, too soon-early life-threatening experiences and
frequent reminders of her close brush with death by her mother-but
she also was not able to develop traditional denial-based defenses
against death anxiety. She could not expect protection or rescue from
her parents: her father had, in effect, died, and her mother was herself
overwhelmed by life. She could neither exile death to a distant realm
nor develop credence in her own inviolability. Death was an imminent
presence, it had almost snared her on more than on~ occasion, and she
viewed herself as very vulnerable and very fragile.
   Sylvia remembers trying to take solace in religious doctrine and
pleading with her grandmother to prove to her that there was a God,
because if there were, He would prevent her from dying or take care of
her when she died. She was raised a Southern Baptist with all that reli-
gion's hell and brimstone accouterments. On several occasions when
she was ill as a child she had made a bargain with God: "Spare my life,
and I will become a nun and devote my life to you." Now, decades lat-
er, Sylvia still brooded over her betrayal of that contract.
   Our individual sessions devoted to death anamnesis were produc-
tive, and Sylvia became much more aware of the extent of her fear of
death and of the role this fear played in her life. As she proceeded in
the therapy group, she became aware of her terror of growing old and
of her exceedingly maladaptive defense, which consisted of a "freeze
and camouflage" maneuver. In other words, she suspended living and
growing, in the magical hope that death might simply overlook her.
She neglected her physical appearance and spent evenings and week-
ends vegetating. She had become increasingly obese because of some
magical belief that, if she could avoid becoming thin and emaciated
like her mother, then she could avoid death. (Hattie Rosenberg de-
scribes identical dynamics in one of her patients. 31 ) Her suspension of
living was brought home to her in the group when one of the men
brought her flowers on her birthday. She caught her breath as she be-
came aware of how much she wanted a lover, and of how much she
had missed over the last several years by straddling the fence between
living and not living.
   Sylvia also became aware of the fact that she treated herself like a dy-
                                                                        201


                                                          I I DEATH
ing person and made certain demands on others to treat her according-
ly. Once, when she was attacked for her hypochondriacal rumination
in the group, she blurted out, "How can you treat me like this when
I'm dying?" She realized the absurdity of the statement but also that it
was a phrase she had muttered sotto voce for many years.
   Much of Sylvia's work in the group centered about her relationship
with Charles and with me. Her relationship with Charles became much
more real: she stopped denying his illness, stopped urging him to seek
a healer's help, and stopped competing with him for the title of the in-
dividual in the group most close to death. Week by week she slowly be-
gan to relinquish her belief in my omnipotence. While she tried to
hold on to her image of me as a figure larger than life, she also became
aware of her impatience with me for my fallibility. Accordingly, I was
careful not to assume a post of omniscience but was as open and trans-
parent as possible. Sylvia's improvement became noticeable and solid.
She began facing death rather than being paralyzed by it. She realized
that to escape death anxiety she had attempted in the past to merge
with her therapist or friends. Even television served that purpose, and
when she was very much afraid of death, she would watch television
for long periods of time because "simply hearing a voice makes me re-
alize I'm still alive." She stopped being afraid of loneliness and began
to feel that it would be possible for her to live a satisfying life even
without a comforting dependent relationship with a child or a man.
(There is an old saying: "He who carries his own light need not fear
the dark.")
   She began to groom herself, to lose weight, and to build up a social
life outside the group. The group had, for two years, constituted her
entire social world, and we realized that she was approaching termina-
tion when in one meeting she announced that she had to leave thirty
minutes early because of a dinner date. The most striking occurrence,
however, was her announcement to the group that for several weeks
she had been meditating daily on her mother's death-not an obsessive
rumination as had often been the case in the past, but a conscious
meditation on all the horrible aspects of her mother's death, with the
deliberate plan for mastering it through total familiarity. This decision
was especially important since it was a plan she had conceived herself
rather than one suggested by the therapist. For years she had been ob-
sessed with the idea that she would die at the same age as her mother.
The group observed that she no longer spoke of this obsession, and she
replied "I haven't thought about that for a long time. It simply isn't
part of my experience any more. I'm into living now."
202


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
   She made a firm decision to terminate the group and, expectedly,
suffered recrudescence of many of her symptoms. She experienced
some nightmares, some death panics in the middle of the night, and
fleeting desires to petition some superior figure for relief. This exacer-
bation of symptomatology, however, was brief, perhaps in part because
the therapist had predicted that it would occur in the face of the pain
of termination. At her last session she brought this dream:
       I was in a large cave and there was a guide there who promised, I
       thought, to show me some dazzling exhibition. However, there was
       nothing at all in the cave, no paintings or art work of any sort. He then
       took me into another room which was a rectangular room, perhaps the
       size of the group therapy room here and once again there was no paint-
       ings or any kind of exhibition. Finally the only thing I could see were a
       couple of windows overlooking some drab, gray skies and oak trees.
       Then on the way going out the guide suddenly changed, he had red hair
       and incredible magnetism so that I thought he was absolutely electric.
       There was something very very strong going on between the two of us.
       A very short time later I saw him again and he had seemed to have lost
       all of the magnetism and become a normal man in blue jeans again.
   This dream is a splendid and poignant depiction of the relinquish-
ment of magic; it portrays Sylvia's coming to terms with the illusory
quality of her belief in the ultimate rescuer. In the dream I cannot
show her a dazzling exhibition; instead of enchanting paintings, I offer
only windows looking out at the drab reality of the world. Toward the
end of the dream Sylvia makes one final attempt to encloak me in mag-
ic: I suddenly become a figure with extrahuman qualities. But the old
self-deceptive spell has lost its staying power, and I soon revert back
into what I really am-a guide, no more, no less.
   In her previous therapies Sylvia had always made spasmodic termi-
nations. She so dreaded the separation, the saying goodbye, and the re-
alization that the therapist's powers were limited that she avoided the
final sessions and broke off contact abruptly. Now she directly con-
fronted the separation process (and the underlying reminders of death)
in the same way she confronted death anxiety: rather than being over-
come by it, she took it into herself and moved through the anxiety to ex-
perience a richer life than she had known before.
                                                                            203


                                                             I I DEATH
                      Problems of Psychotherapy
DENIAL BY PATIENT AND THERAPIST
   Despite the omnipresence of death and the vast number of rich op-
portunities available for exploring it, most therapists will find extraor-
dinarily difficult the tasks of increasing the patient's death awareness
and working through death anxiety. Denial confounds the process ev-
ery step of the way. Fear of death exists at every level of awareness-
from the most conscious, superficiaL intellectualized levels to the
realm of deepest unconsciousness. Often a patient's receptivity, at su-
perficial levels, of the therapist's interpretation acts in the service of
denial at deeper layers. A patient may be responsive to the therapist's
suggestion that the patient examine his or her feelings about his or her
finiteness, but gradually the session becomes unproductive, the materi-
al runs dry, and the discourse moves into an intellectualized discus-
sion. It is important at these times that the therapist not leap to the er-
roneous conclusion that he or she is drilling a dry well. The blocking,
the lack of associations, the splitting off of affect are all manifestations
of resistance and should be treated accordingly. One of Freud's first
discoveries in the practice of dynamic therapy was that the therapist re-
peatedly comes up against a psychological force in the patient that op-
poses the therapeutic work. ('Through my psychic work I had to op-
pose a psychic force in the patient which opposed the pathogenic idea
from becoming conscious.") 32
   The therapist must persevere. The therapist must continue to collect
evidence, to work with dreams, to persist in his or her observations, to
make the same points, albeit with different emphases, over and over
again. Observations about the existence of death may seem so banaL so
overly obvious that the therapist feels fatuous in persisting to make
them. Yet simplicity and persistence are necessary to overcome denial.
One patient, a depressed, masochistic, suicidal individual, in a debrief-
ing session some months after termination of therapy, described the
most important comment I had made to her during therapy. She had
frequently described her yearning for death and, at other times, the
various things she would like to do in life. I had made, more than once,
the embarrassingly simple observation that there is only one possible
sequence for these events: experience first and death last.
   The patient is not the only source of denial, of course. Frequently the
denial of the therapist silently colludes with that of the patient. The
therapist no less than the patient must confront death and be anxious
 204


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
in the face of it. Much preparation is required of the therapist who
must in everyday work be aware of death. My co-therapist and I be-
came acutely aware of this necessity while leading a group of patients
with metastatic cancer. During the first months of the group the discus-
sion remained superficial: much talk about doctors, medicines, treat-
ment regimes, pain, fatigue, physical limitations, and so forth. We con-
sidered this superficiality to be defensive in nature-a signal of the
depth of the patients' fear and despair. Accordingly, we respected the
defense and led the group in a highly cautious manner.
   Only much later did we learn that we therapists had played an active
role in keeping the group superficial. When we could tolerate our anxi-
ety and follow the patients' leads, then there was no subject too fright-
ening for the group to deal with explicitly and constructively. The dis-
cussion was often extraordinarily painful for the therapists. The group
was observed through a one-way mirror by a number of student mental
health professionals, and on several occasions some had to leave the
observation room to compose themselves. The experience of working
with dying patients has propelled many therapists back for another
course of personal therapy-often highly profitable for them, since
many had not dealt with concerns about death in their first, traditional
therapy experiences.
   If a therapist is to help patients confront and incorporate death into
life, he or she must have personally worked through these issues. An
interesting parallel is to be found in the initiation rites of healers in
primitive cultures, many of which have a tradition requiring that a sha-
man pass through some ecstatic experience that entails suffering,
death, and resurrection. Sometimes the initiation is a true sickness, and
the individual who hovers long between life and death is selected for
shamanism. Generally the experience is a mystical vision. To take one,
not atypical example, a Tungus (a Siberian tribe) shaman described his
initiation as consisting of a confrontation with shaman ancestors who
surrounded him, pierced him with arrows, cut off his flesh, tore out his
bones, drank his blood, and then reassembled him. 33 Several cultures
require that the novice shaman sleep on a grave or remain bound for
several nights in a cemetery. 3'
WHY STIR UP A HORNET'S NEST?
   Many therapists avoid discussions of death with a patient not be-
cause of denial but because of a deliberate decision based on the belief
that the thought of death would aggravate that patient's condition.
Why stir up a hornet's nest? Why plunge the patient deeply into a
                                                                      205


                                                            I I DEATH
theme that can only increase anxiety and about which one can do noth-
ing? Everyone must face death. Does not the neurotic patient have
quite enough troubles without being burdened with reminders of the
bitter quaff awaiting all humans?
   It is one thing, these therapists feel, to excavate and examine neurot-
ic problems; there at least they can be of some help. But to explore the
real reality, the bitter, immutable facts of life, seems not only folly but
antitherapeutic. The patient dealing with unreconciled oedipal con-
flicts, for example, is hamstrung by phantasmal torments: some constel-
lation of internal and external events that occurred long ago persists in
the timeless unconscious and haunts the patient. The patient responds
to current situations in distorted fashion: to the present as though it
were the past. The therapist's mandate is clear: to illuminate the pres-
ent, to expose and scatter the demons of the past, to help the patient
detoxify events that are intrinsically benign but irrationally expe-
rienced as noxious.
   But death? Death is not a ghost from the past. And it is not intrinsi-
cally benign. What can be done with it?
   Increased Anxiety in Therapy. First, it is true that the thought of our
finitude has a force field of anxiety about it. To enter the field is to
heighten anxiety. The therapeutic approach I describe here is dynamic
and uncovering; it is not supportive or repressive. Existential therapy
does increase the patient's discomfort. It is not possible to plunge into
the roots of one's anxiety without, for a period of time, experiencing
heightened anxiousness and depression.
   The case of Sylvia is clearly illustrative. After Charles told the group
about his cancer, she experienced a violent eruption of anxiety and a
recrudescence of many primitive defenses against this anxiety. Earlier I
described two patients reported by Stern who were in long-term indi-
vidual analysis and who successfully terminated therapy only after an
explicit and exhaustive working through of the mortal terror emanat-
ing from the fear of death. 35 Once the therapy of each of these two pa-
tients entered the realm of death anxiety, each experienced a dramatic
recrudescence of dysphoria. When one patient worked through his fan-
tasy of the analyst's protecting him against death and realized that
there was to be no deliverer, he was plunged into a deep depression.
"His hyperactivity in his work and in his hobbies turned into feelings
of being utterly helpless, of living in a haze, of dissolution of his iden-
tity. This induced a regression to ambivalent symbiotic wishes, wishes
for oral incorporation of his wife, of the analyst, and tremendous rage
against both." The other patient, too, realized that his neurotic de-
206


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
fenses would not protect him against death, and his analysis took a
similar course. "He became depressed, felt constantly in a haze, and ex-
 perienced the recrudescence of many infantile patterns which attempt-
ed a last-ditch defense against death." Each of the four other cases that
Stern reported also experienced a temporary dysphoria and depression
as they confronted the future trauma of death.
   Bugental, in his excellent discussion of the subject, refers to this
phase of treatment as the "existential crisis" -an inevitable crisis
which occurs when the defenses used to forestall existential anxiety are
breached, allowing one to become truly aware of one's basic situation
in life. 36
 Life Satisfaction and Death Anxiety: A Therapeutic Foothold
From a conceptual standpoint the therapist does well to keep in mind
that the anxiety surrounding death is both neurotic and normal. All hu-
man beings experience death anxiety, but some experience such exces-
sive amounts of it that it spills into many realms of their experience
and results in heightened dysphoria and I or a series of defenses
against anxiety which constrict growth and often themselves generate
secondary anxiety. Why some individuals are brought down by the
conditions that all must face is a question I have already addressed: the
individuaL because of a series of unusual life experiences, is both un-
duly traumatized by death anxiety and fails to erect the "normal" de-
fenses against existential anxiety. What the therapist encounters is a
failure of the homeostatic regulation of death anxiety.
   One approach available to the therapist is to focus on the patient's
current dynamics that alter that regulation. I believe that one particu-
larly useful equation for the clinician is: death anxiety is inversely propor-
tional to life satisfaction.
   John Hinton reports some interesting and relevant research find-
ings.37 He studied sixty patients with terminal cancer and correlated
their attitudes (including "sense of satisfaction or fulfillment in life")
with their feelings and reactions during terminal illness. The sense of
satisfaction in life was rated from interviews with the patient and the
patient's spouse. The feelings and reactions during the terminal illness
were measured by interviews with the patients and by rating scales
                                                                          207


                                                            I I DEATH
completed by nurses and spouses. The data revealed that, to a highly
significant degree, "When life had appeared satisfying, dying was less
troublesome .... Lesser satisfaction with past life went with a more
troubled view of the illness and its outcome." The lesser the life satis-
faction, the greater was the depression, anxiety, anger, and overall con-
cern about the illness and levels of satisfaction with the medical care.
   These results seem counterintuitive because, on a superficial leveL
one might conclude that the unsatisfied and disillusioned might wel-
come the respite of death. But the opposite is true: a sense of fulfill-
ment, a feeling that life has been well lived, mitigates against the terror
of death. Nietzsche, in his characteristic hyperbole, stated: "What has
become perfect, all that is ripe-wants to die. All that is unripe wants
to live. All that suffers wants to live, that it may become ripe and joy-
ous and longing-longing for what is further, higher, brighter." 38
   Surely this insight gives the therapist a foothold! If he can help the
patient experience an increased satisfaction in life, he can allay exces-
sive anxiety. Of course, there is a circularity about this equation since it
is because of an excessive death anxiety that the individual lives a con-
stricted life-a life dedicated more to safety, survivaL and relief from
pain than to growth and fulfillment. Searles poses the same dilemma:
"The patient cannot face death unless he is a whole person, yet he can
become a truly whole person only by facing death." The problem (and
it is especially critical with schizophrenic patients, Searles believes) is
that "the anxiety concerning life's finitude is too great to face unless
one has the strengthening knowledge that one is a whole person .... A
person cannot bear to face the prospect of inevitable death unless he
has had the experience of fully living, and the schizophrenic has not
yet fully lived." 39
   Yet still there is a foothold. The therapist must not be overawed by
the past. It is not necessary that one experience forty years of whole, in-
tegrated living to compensate for the previous forty years of shadow
life. Tolstoy's Ivan Ilyich, through his confrontation with death, ar-
rived at an existential crisis and, witlt only a few days of life remain-
ing, transformed himself and was able to flood, retrospectively, his en-
tire life with meaning.
   The less the life satisfaction, the greater the death anxiety. This prin-
ciple is clearly illustrated by one of my patients, Philip, a fifty-three-
year-old, highly successful business executive. Philip had always been
a severe workaholic; he worked sixty to seventy hours a week, always
lugged a briefcase brimming with work home every evening, and dur-
ing one recent two-year period worked on the east coast and commuted
208


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
weekends to his home on the west coast. He had little life satisfaction:
his work afforded safety not pleasure; he worked not because he want-
ed to, but because he had to, to assuage anxiety. He hardly knew his
wife and children. Years ago his wife had had a brief extramarital af-
fair, and he had never forgiven her-not so much for the actual act, but
because the affair and its attendant pain had been a major source of dis-
traction from his work. His wife and children had suffered from the es-
trangement, and he had never dipped into this potential reservoir of
love, life satisfaction, and meaning.
   Then a disaster occurred that stripped Philip of all his defenses. Be-
cause of severe setbacks in the aerospace industry, his company failed
and was absorbed by another corporation. Philip suddenly found him-
self unemployed and possibly, because of his age and high executive
position, unemployable. He developed severe anxiety and at this point
sought psychotherapy. At first his anxiety was entirely centered on his
work. He ruminated endlessly about his job. Waking regularly at 4 A.M.,
he lay awake for hours thinking of work: how to break the news to his
employees, how best to phase out his department, how to express his
anger at the way he had been handled.
   Philip could not find a new position and, as his last day of work ap-
proached, he became frantic. Gradually in therapy we pried loose his
anxiety from the work concerns to which it adhered like barnacles to a
pier. It became apparent that Philip had considerable death anxiety.
Nightly he was tormented by a dream in which he circled the very
edge of a "black pit." Another frightening recurrent dream consisted of
his walking on the narrow crest of a steep dune on the beach and los-
ing his balance. He repeatedly awoke from the dream mumbling ''I'm
not going to make it." (His father was a sailor who drowned before
Philip was born.)
   Philip had no pressing financial concerns: he had a generous sever-
ance settlement, and a recent large inheritance provided considerable
security. But the time! How was he going to use the time. Nothing
meant very much to Philip, and he sank into despair. Then one night
an important incident occurred. He had been unable to go to sleep and
at approximately 3:00 A.M. went downstairs to read and drink a cup of
tea. He heard a noise at the window, went over to it, and found himself
face to face with a huge stocking-masked man. After his startle and the
alarm had subsided, after the police had left and the search was called
off, Philip's real panic began. A thought occurred to him, a jarring
thought, that sent a powerful shudder through his frame, "Something
might have happened to Mary and the children." When, during our
                                                                      209


                                                           I I DEATH
therapy hour, he described this incident, his reaction, and his thought,
I, rather than comfort him, reminded him that something will happen
to Mary, to the children, and to himself as well.
   Philip passed through a period of feeling wobbly and dazed. All of
his customary denial structures no longer functioned: his job, his spe-
cialness, his climb to glory, his sense of invulnerability. Just as he had
faced the masked burglar, he now faced, at first flinchingly and then
more steadily, some fundamental facts of life: groundlessness, the in-
exorable passage of time, and the inevitability of death. This confronta-
tion provided Philip with a sense of urgency, and he worked hard in
therapy to reclaim some satisfaction and meaning in his life. We fo-
cused especially on intimacy-an important source of life satisfaction
that he had never enjoyed.
   Philip had invested so much in his belief in specialness that he
dreaded facing (and sharing with others) his feelings of helplessness. I
urged him to tell all inquirers the truth-that he was out of a job and
having trouble finding another-and to monitor his feelings. He
shrank away from the task at first but gradually learned that the shar-
ing of vulnerability opened the door to intimacy. At one session I of-
fered to send his resume to a friend of mine, the president of a com-
pany in a related field, who might have a position for him. Philip
thanked me in a polite, formal manner; but when he went to his car, he
"cried like a baby" for the first time in thirty-five years. We talked
about that cry a great deaL what it meant, how it felt, and why he could
not cry in front of me. As he learned to accept his vulnerability, his
sense of communion, at first with me and then with his family, deep-
ened; he achieved an intimacy with others he had never previously at-
tained. His orientation to time changed dramatically: no longer did he
see time as an enemy-to be concealed or killed. Now, with day after
day of free time, he began to savor time and to luxuriate in it. He also
became acquainted with other, long dormant parts of himself and for
the first time in decades allowed some of his creative urges expression
in both painting and writing. After eight months of unemployment,
Philip obtained a new and challenging position in another city. In our
last session he said, "I've gone through hell in the last few months. But,
you know, as horrible as this has been, I'm glad I couldn't get a job im-
mediately. I'm thankful I was forced to go through this." What Philip
learned was that a life dedicated to the concealment of reality, to the
denial of death, restricts experience and will ultimately cave in upon
itself.
210


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
                             Death Desensitization
Another concept that offers a therapeutic foothold against death anxi-
ety is "desensitization." "Desensitization to death" -a vulgar phrase,
which is demeaning because it juxtaposes the deepest human concerns
with mechanistic techniques. Yet it is difficult to avoid the phrase in a
discussion of the therapist's techniques for dealing with death anxiety.
It seems that, with repeated contact, one can get used to anything-
even to dying. The therapist may help the patient deal with death ter-
ror in ways similar to the techniques that he uses to conquer any other
form of dread. He exposes the patient over and over to the fear in at-
tenuated doses. He helps the patient handle the dreaded object and to
inspect it from all sides.
   Montaigne was aware of this principle and wrote:
       It seems to me, however, that there is a certain way of familiarizing our-
       selves with death and trying it out to some extent. We can have an expe-
       rience of it that is, if not entire and perfect, at least not useless, and that
       makes us more fortified and assured. If we cannot reach it, we can ap-
       proach it, we can reconnoiter it; and if we do not penetrate as far as its
       fort, at least we shall see and become acquainted with the approaches to
       it.'"
   In several years of working with groups of cancer patients, I have
seen desensitization many times. Over and over a patient approaches
his or her dread until gradually it diminishes through sheer familiar-
ity. The model set by other patients and by the therapist-whether it
be resoluteness, uneasy stoic acceptance, or equanimity-helps to de-
toxify death for many patients.
   A basic principle of a behavioral approach to anxiety reduction is
that the individual be exposed to the feared stimulus (in carefully cali-
brated amounts) in a psychological state and setting designed to retard
the development of anxiety. The group approach employed this strate-
gy. The group often began (and ended) with some anxiety-reducing
meditational or muscle-relaxing exercise; each patient was surrounded
by others with the same illness; they trusted each other and felt com-
pletely understood. The exposure was graduated in that one of the op-
erating norms of the group was that each member be allowed to pro-
ceed at his or her own speed and that no pressure be placed on anyone
 to confront more than he or she wished to.
   Another useful principle in anxiety management is dissection and
analysis. One's feeling of organismic catastrophic dread generally in-
                                                                                  211


                                                           I I DEATH
eludes many fearful components that can yield to rational analysis. It
may be helpful to encourage the patient (both the everyday psycho-
therapy patient and the dying one) to examine his or her death and sort
out all the various component fears. Many individuals are over-
whelmed by a sense of helplessness in the face of death; and, indeed,
the groups of dying patients I have worked with devoted much time to
counteracting this source of dread. The major strategy is to separate an-
cillary feelings of helplessness from the true helplessness that issues
from facing one's unalterable existential situation. I have seen dying
patients regain a sense of potency and control by electing to control
those aspects of their lives that were amenable to control. For example,
a patient may change his mode of interacting with his physician: he
may insist on being informed fully about his illness or on being includ-
ed in important treatment decisions. Or he may change to another phy-
sician if he is dissatisfied with the current one. Other patients involve
themselves in social action. Others develop a sense of choicefulness;
they discover with exhilaration that they can elect not to do the things
they do not wish to do. Others who believe that developing new ways
to manage psychological stress will influence the course of their can-
cer, engage actively in psychotherapy. And, when all else seems be-
yond one's controL one, even then, has the power to control one's atti-
tude toward one's fate-to reconstrue what one cannot deny.
   There are other component fears: the pain of dying, afterlife, the fear
of the unknown, concern for one's family, fear for one's body, loneli-
ness, regression. In achievement-oriented Western countries death is
curiously equated with failure. Each of these component fears, exam-
ined separately and rationally, is less frightening than the entire ge-
stalt. Each is an obviously disagreeable aspect of dying; yet, neither
separately nor in concert, do these fears need to elicit a cataclysmic re-
action. It is significant, however, that many patients, when asked to
analyze their death terrors, find that they correspond to none of these
but to something primitive and ineffable. In the adult unconscious
dwells the young child's irrational terror: death is experienced as an
eviL crueL mutilating force. Recall the terrifying children's fantasies of
death described in chapter 3, views of death far more horrible than
those of the mature adult. Th~se fantasies, no less than oedipal or cas-
tration fears, are atavistic unconscious tags that disrupt the adult's abil-
ity to recognize reality and to respond appropriately. The therapist
works with such fears as with any other distortions of reality: he at-
tempts to identify, to illuminate, and to scatter these ghosts of the past.
212


5 I Death and Psychotherapy
DEATH DESENSITIZATION: EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE
   Several reports in the literature (all psychology doctoral disserta-
tions) describe workshops on death awareness that employ many of
these approaches to death desensitization and measure quantitative
changes in death anxiety. One eight-hour marathon workshop-which
consisted of discussions of death, the viewing of a movie about death,
guided fantasies (in a state of deep muscle relaxation) of each member's
own terminal illness, death, and funeral-reported that the eight ex-
perimental subjects (in contrast to a control no-group sample) "reorga-
nized their ideas about death," used less denial in confronting their
own deaths, and, after an eight-week follow-up, had lower death anxi-
ety scores. In post-group interviews some of the subjects gratuitously
averred that the workshop catalyzed significant other life changes.
One alcoholic, for example, reported that the laboratory had had an
enormous impact on him: he had decided that he did not wish to die
the demeaning death of an alcoholic, and had become totally
abstinent. 41
   Another similar death desensitization program, SYATD ("shaping
your attitudes toward death") reduced death fears (as measured by two
manifest death anxiety scales).'2 A "death and self-discovery work-
shop" laboratory resulted in increased death anxiety-but also in an in-
crease in a sense of purpose in life.'3 Other programs have shown an im-
mediate post-workshop reduction in anxiety, with a return to pre-
workshop levels in four weeks." Finally, a six-week death education
class for nurses did not affect death anxiety immediately but resulted
in a significant reduction four weeks later.'5
   Death is only one component of the human being's existential situa-
tion, and a consideration of death awareness illuminates only one facet
of existential therapy. To arrive at a fully balanced therapeutic ap-
proach, we must examine the therapeutic implications of each of the
other ultimate concerns. Death helps us understand anxiety, offers a
dynamic structure upon which to base interpretation, and serves as a
boundary experience that is capable of instigating a massive shift in
perspective. Each of the other ultimate concerns, to which I now turn,
contributes another segment of a comprehensive psychotherapy sys-
tem: freedom helps us understand responsibility assumption, commit-
ment to change, decision and action; isolation illuminates the role of re-
lationship; whereas meaninglessness turns our attention to the principle
of engagement.
                                                                      213


                   PART II
                  Freedom
I   N THE SECTION on the concept of death in psychotherapy I sug-
gested that the clinician would find the discussion strange, yet oddly
familiar: "strange" because the existential approach cuts across tradi-
tional categories and clusters clinical observations differently; but "fa-
miliar" because in his or her bones the experienced clinician appre-
hends the importance and the omnipresence of the concept of death.
"Strange yet familiar" will apply to this section as well. Though the
term "freedom" is not found in the psychotherapist's lexicon, the con-
cept of freedom plays an indispensable role in both theory and practice
of all traditional and innovative therapies. To illustrate, consider these
incidents in therapy that have come to my attention over the past sev-
eral years.
                                                                       215


                                                           II I FREEDOM
    • To a patient, who insists that her behavior is controlled by her uncon-
      scious, a therapist says, "Whose unconscious is it?"
   • A group leader has a "can't" bell which he rings whenever a patient in
      his group says "I can't." The patient is asked to recant and then to restate
      the phrase as "I won't."
   • A patient caught up in a highly self-destructive relationship stated: "I
      cannot decide what to do, I can't bring myself to end the relationship, but
      I pray that I could catch him in bed with another woman so that I would
      be able to leave him."
   • My first supervisor, an orthodox Freudian analyst who firmly believed in
      Freud's deterministic view of behavior, said to me twenty years ago in our
      first meeting, "The goal of psychotherapy is to bring the patient to the
      point where he can make a free choice." Yet, though we had over fifty
      more supervisory sessions, I do not recall his ever having said another
      word about "choosing"-which he pronounced as the goal of therapy.
   • Many therapists repeatedly ask patients to change their speech and
      "own" what happens to them. Not "he bugs me," but "I let him bug me."
      Not "I have a mind that skips," but "when I get hurt and feel like crying,
      I defend myself by being confused."
   • A therapist asked a forty-five-year-old patient to have a dialogue with his
      dead mother and to repeat this sentence several times: "I will not change
      until you treat me differently when I was ten years old."
   • Otto Will, a legendary therapist, is reported to have periodically inter-
      rupted the interminable ruminations of a highly restricted obsessive pa-
      tient with such suggestions as: "Say, why don't you change your name
      and move to California?"
   • At 5:00P.M. a sexually compulsive man arrived by plane in a city where
      he had a professional commitment the following morning. While still at
      the airport he hurriedly began phoning a series of women acquaintances
      to arrange for a sexual liaison that evening. No luck! They all had pre-
      vious engagements. (Of course, he could easily have phoned them days
      or, indeed, weeks earlier.) His response was relief: "Thank God, now I can
      read and get a good night's sleep, which is what I really wanted to do all
      along."
  These incidents may appear to be a potpourri of patients' thoughtless
utterances and of smug, gimmicky therapists' ploys. Yet, as I shall dem-
onstrate, they are all of a piece, bound together by the conceptual
thread of freedom. Furt~ermore, though these incidents are frocked in
insubstantial garb, they do not represent insubstantial concerns. Each,
properly considered, will be seen to have implications that stretch
down into the socket of existence. Each incident offers a perspective on
the theme of freedom, and each will serve as a springboard for the dis-
cussion of some therapeutically relevant aspect of freedom.
  To the philosopher, "freedom" has broad personaL sociaL moraL and
political implications and consequently encompasses a wide terrain.
216


                                                       II I FREEDOM
Moreover, the issue is intensely controversial: the philosophical debate
concerning freedom and causality has not ceased for two thousand
years. Throughout the centuries the concept of absolute freedom has
always engendered bitter opposition because it has clashed with pre-
vailing world views: first, with the belief in divine providence; later,
with the laws of scientific causality; still later, with the Hegelian view
of history as a meaningful progression, or with Marxist or Freudian de-
terministic theories. However in this section, as elsewhere in this book,
I shall examine only those aspects of freedom that have important, ev-
eryday relevance to the clinician: specifically, in chapter 6, the individ-
ual's freedom to create his or her own life, and in chapter 7 the individ-
ual's freedom to desire, to choose, to act and-more important for the
purposes of psychotherapy-to change.
                                                                       217


                  CHAPTER 6
                   Responsibility
RESPONSIBILITY has many connotations. We label a trustworthy,
dependable person "responsible." "Responsibility" also implies ac-
countability-legaL financiaL or moral. In the mental health field, "re-
sponsibility" refers to the patient's capability for rational conduct as
well as to the therapist's moral commitment to the patient. Although
none of these connotations is entirely irrelevant to this discussion, I
use "responsibility" here in a specific sense-in the same sense as did
Jean-Paul Sartre when he wrote that to be responsible is to be "the un-
contested author of an event or a thing." 1 Responsibility means author-
ship. To be aware of responsibility is to be aware of creating one's own
self, destiny, life predicament, feelings and, if such be the case, one's
own suffering. For the patient who will not accept such responsibility,
who persists in blaming others-either other individuals or other
forces-for his or her dysphoria, no real therapy is possible.
              Responsibility as an Existential Concern
But how is responsibility existential? That death is an existential issue
is self-evident: Mortality and finiteness are obvious givens of existence.
218


6 I Responsibility
But when we speak of responsibility or, as in the following chapter, of
willing, then the existential referent is not immediately evident.
   At the deepest level, responsibility accounts for existence. This was
brought home to me many years ago by a simple experience so potent
that it has remained vividly with me. I was snorkling alone in the
warm, sunny, clear waters of a tropical lagoon and experienced, as I of-
ten do while in the water, a deep sense of pleasure and coziness. I felt
at home. The warmth of the water, the beauty of the coral bottom, the
sparkling silver minnows, the neon-bright coral fish, the regal angel
fish, the fleshy anemone fingers, the esthetic pleasure of gliding and
carving through the water, all in concert created an underwater elysi-
um. And, then, for reasons I have never understood, I had a sudden
radical shift in perspective. I suddenly realized that none of my watery
companions shared my cozy experience. The regal angel fish did not
know that it was beautiful, the minnows that they sparkled, the coral
fish that they were brilliant. Nor for that matter did the black needle
urchins or the bottom debris (which I tried not to see) know of their
ugliness. The at-homeness, the coziness, the smiling hour, the beauty,
the beckoning, the comfort-none of these really existed. I had created
the entire experience! I could by the same token glide through oil-
slicked waters bobbing with empty plastic Clorox containers and
choose to consider it either beautiful or disgusting. At the deepest level
the choice and the creation were mine. In Husserl's terms my noema
("meaning") had exploded, and I had become aware of my constitutive
function. It was as though I peered through a rent in the curtain of dai-
ly reality to a more fundamental and deeply unsettling reality.
   In his novel Nausea, in one of the great passages of modern literature,
Sartre describes this moment of illumination-the discovery of
responsibility.
          The roots of the chestnut tree were sunk in the ground just under my
       bench. I couldn't remember it was a root any more. The words had van-
       ished and with them the significance of things, their methods of use,
       and the feeble points of reference which men have traced on their sur-
       face. I was sitting, stooping forward, head bowed, alone in front of this
       black, knotty mass, entirely beastly, which frightened me. Then I had
       this vision.
          It left me breathless. Never, until these last few days, had I under-
       stood the meaning of "existence." I was like the others, like the ones
       walking along the seashore, all dressed in their spring finery. I said, like
       them, "The ocean is green; that white speck up there is a seagull," but I
       didn't feel that it existed or that the seagull was an "existing seagull."
          ... And then all of a sudden, there it was, clear as day: existence had
       suddenly unveiled itself. It had lost the harmless look of an abstract cate-
                                                                               219


                                                             II I FREEDOM
        ry: it was the very paste of things, the root was kneaded into existence.
        Or rather the root, the park gates, the bench, the sparse grass, all that
        had vanished: the diversity of things, their individuality, were only an
        appearance, a veneer. This veneer had melted, leaving soft, monstrous
        masses, all in disorder-naked, in a frightful, obscene nakedness ....
        This root, on the other hand, existed in such a way that I could not ex-
        plain it. Knotty, inert, nameless, it fascinated me, filled my eyes, brought
        me back unceasingly to its own existence. In vain to repeat: "This is a
        root" -it didn't work any more!
   Sartre's protagonist confronts the raw "monstrous masses," the "very
paste of things" -stuff that has no form, no meaning until he supplies
it. The knowledge of his true "situation" crashes in on him as he dis-
covers his responsibility for the world. The world acquired significance
only through the way it is constituted by the human being-in Sartre's
terms the "for-itself." There is not meaning in the world outside of or
independent of the for-itself.
   Western and Eastern philosophers alike have pondered the problem
of man's responsibility for the nature of reality. The heart of Kant's
revolution in philosophy was his position that it is human conscious-
ness, the nature of the human being's mental structures, that provides
the external form of reality. Space itself, according to Kant, "is not
something objective and real but something subjective and ideal; it is,
as it were, a schema issuing by a constant law from the nature of the
mind for the coordinating of all outer sensa whatever." 3
   What are the implications of this world view for the psychology of
the individual? It was Heidegger, and then Sartre, who explored the
meaning of responsibility for the individual being. Heidegger referred
to the individual as dasein (not as "I" or "one" or "ego" or a "human be-
ing") for a specific reason: he wished always to emphasize the dual na-
ture of human existence. The individual is "there" (da), but also he or
she constitutes what is there. The ego is two-in-one: it is an empirical
ego (an objective ego, something that is "there," an object in the world)
and a transcendental (constituting) ego which constitutes (that is, is "re-
sponsible" for) itself and the world. Responsibility viewed in this man-
ner is inextricably linked to freedom. Unless the individual is free to
constitute the world in any of a number of ways, then the concept of
responsibility has no meaning. The universe is contingent; everything
that is could have been created differently. Sartre's view of freedom is
far-reaching: the human being is not only free but is doomed to free-
dom. Furthermore, freedom extends beyond being responsible for the
world (that is, for imbuing the world with significance): one is also en-
tirely responsible for one's life, not only for one's actions but for one's failures
to act.
220


6 I Responsibility
   There is, as I write, mass starvation in another part of the world. Sar-
tre would state that I bear responsibility for this starvation. I, of course,
protest: I know little of what happens there, and I feel I can do little to
alter the tragic state of affairs. But Sartre would point out that I choose
to keep myself uninformed, and that I decide at this very instant to
write these words instead of engaging myself in the tragic situation! I
could, after all, organize a rally to raise funds or publicize the situation
through my contacts in publishing, but I choose to ignore it. I bear re-
sponsibility for what I do and for what I choose to ignore. Sartre's
point in this regard is not moral: he does not say that I should be doing
something different, but he says that what I do do is my responsibility.
Both of these levels of responsibility-significance attribution and re-
sponsibility for life conduct-have, as we shall see, enormous implica-
tions for psychotherapy.
   Both to constitute (to be responsible for) oneself and one's world and
to be aware of one's responsibility is a deeply frightening insight. Con-
sider its implication. Nothing in the world has significance except by
virtue of one's own creation. There are no rules, no ethical systems, no
values; there is no external referent whatsoever; there is no grand de-
sign in the universe. In Sartre's view, the individual alone is the cre-
ator (this is what he means by "man is the being whose project is to be
god"). 5
   To experience existence in this manner is a dizzying sensation. Noth-
ing is as it seemed. The very ground beneath one seems to open up. In-
deed, groundlessness is a commonly used term for a subjective experi-
ence of responsibility awareness. Many existential philosophers have
described the anxiety of groundlessness as "ur-anxiety" -the most fun-
damental anxiety, an anxiety that cuts deeper even than the anxiety as-
sociated with death. In fact, many consider death anxiety as a symbol
for the anxiety of groundlessness. Philosophers often make the distinc-
tion between "my death" and death, or the death of another. What is
truly terrifying about "my death" is that it implies the dissolution of
my world. With "my death," the meaning giver and spectator of the
world dies, too, and is truly confronted with nothingness. 6
   The concerns of "nothingness" and of self-creation have another
deep and unsettling implication: loneliness, an existential loneliness,
which-as I shall discuss in chapter 8-extends far beyond ordinary so-
cial loneliness; it is the loneliness of being separated not only from
people but from the world, as one ordinarily experiences it, as well.
"The responsibility of the 'for-itself' [that is, the individual conscious-
ness] is overwhelming, since it is thanks to the 'for-itself' that it hap-
pens there is a world." 7
                                                                         221


                                                         II I FREEDOM
   We respond to the anxiety of groundlessness as we do when con-
fronted with anxiety: we seek relief. There are many ways to shield
ourselves. First, unlike death anxiety, the anxiety of groundlessness is
not evident in everyday experience. It is not easily intuited by the adult
and probably not experienced at all by the child. Some individuals, like
Sartre's Roquentin in Nausea, have flashes of their constitutive activity
on several occasions in life, but generally it remains far from aware-
ness. One avoids situations (for example, making decisions, isolation,
autonomous action) that, if deeply considered, would make one aware
of one's fundamental groundlessness. Thus one seeks structure, author-
ity, grand designs, magic, something that is bigger than oneself. Even a
tyrant, as Fromm reminds us in Escape from Freedom, is better than no
leader at all. 8 Thus it is that children are upset by freedom and demand
limit setting; panicky psychotic patients exhibit the same need for
structure and limits. The same dynamic underlies the development of
transference in the course of psychotherapy. Other defenses against
the anxiety of groundlessness include the common ones used against
full awareness of "my death," because death denial is an ally of
groundlessness denial.
   Perhaps the most potent defense of all, however, is simply reality as
it is experienced-that is, the appearance of things. To view ourselves
as primal constitutors is to fly in the face of reality as we ordinarily ex-
perience it. Our sense data tell us that the world is "there," and that we
enter and leave it. Yet, as Heidegger and Sartre suggest, appearances
enter the service of denial: we constitute the world in such a way that it ap-
pears independent ofour'constitfu,tion. To constitute the world as an empiri-
cal world means to constitute it as something independent of
ourselves.
   To be taken in by any of these devices that allow us to flee from our
freedom is to live "inauthentically" (Heidegger) or in "bad faith" (Sar-
tre). Sartre considered it his project to liberate individuals from bad
faith and to help them assume responsibility. It is the psychotherapist's
project as well; in much of the remainder of this chapter I shall explore
the clinical ramifications of responsibility avoidance and the tech-
niques available to the therapist to facilitate the process of assumption
of responsibility.
222


 6 I Responsibility
         Responsibility A voidance: Clinical Manifestions
Even the most casual historical review of the field of psychotherapy re-
veals radical changes in the modes whereby therapists offer help to pa-
tients. The riotous proliferation of new, competing therapies appears to
defy any coherent pattern and consequently has at times undermined
the general public's confidence in the field. But a careful look at these
new therapies-as well as at new developments in traditional ther-
apies-reveals that they have one outstanding feature in common: an
emphasis on the assumption of personal responsibility.
   That this is so, that modern approaches focus heavily on responsibil-
ity, is no accident. Therapies reflect, and are shaped by, the pathology
that they must treat. Fin de siecle Vienna, incubator and cradle of Freud-
ian psychology, had all the characteristics of late Victorian culture: in-
stinctual (especially sexual) repression, heavily structured and clearly
defined rules of behavior and manners, separate spheres for men and
women, an emphasis on will power and moral strength, and an intoxi-
cating optimism springing from a scientific positivism that promised to
explain all aspects of the natural order, not excluding human behavior.
Freud realized, quite correctly, that such rigid suppression of natural
inclinations was detrimental to the psyche; libidinal energy that could
not be permitted to surface nakedly begat restrictive defenses and indi-
rect means of expression. The defenses and the oblique mode of libidi-
nal expression together comprised the clinical picture of the classical
psychoneurosis.
   But what would Freud emphasize were he to examine contemporary
American culture-especially in California, whicH. has been the birth-
place of so many of the newer therapeutic approaches? Natural instinc-
tual strivings are given considerable free expression; sexual permis-
siveness, beginning in early adolescence, is, as many surveys have
demonstrated, a reality. A generation of young adults have been
nursed and spoonfed according to a compulsively permissive regimen.
Structure, ritual, boundaries of every type, are being relentlessly dis-
mantled. In the religious orders, Catholic sisters defy the Pope, priests
refuse to remain celibate, women and gay men divide the Episcopal
church on their right to be ordained, and women rabbis lead services
in many synagogues. Students address professors by their first names.
Where are the forbidden dirty words, the professional titles, the man-
uals of manners, the dress codes? A friend of mine, an art critic, charac-
terized the new California culture by describing an incident that oc-
curred on his first visit to Southern California. He stopped at a fast-
                                                                       223


                                                      II I FREEDOM
food drive-in and was given, with his hamburger, a small plastic
container of ketchup. Elsewhere these containers have a dotted line
and the notation to "tear here"; the California container had no dotted
lines, only the simple inscription "tear anywhere."9
   The picture of psychopathology has changed accordingly. The classi-
cal psychoneurotic syndromes have become a rarity. Even a decade ago
an individual with a true psychoneurotic clinical picture was a treasure
eagerly vied for by both young trainees and senior staff. Today's pa-
tient has to cope more with freedom than with suppressed drives. No
longer pushed from within by what he or she "has" to do, or pulled
from without by what he or she "must" or "ought" to do, the patient
has to cope with the problem of choice-with what he or she wants to
do. With increasing frequency patients seek therapy with vague, ill-de-
fined complaints. Indeed, I often finish my first consultative session
with no clear picture of a patient's problem; I consider the fact that the
patient cannot define the problem as the problem. The patient com-
plains of "something missing" from life, of being cut off from feelings,
of emptiness, of zestlessness, or of a sense of being cast adrift. The
course of therapy of such patients is similarly diffuse. The word "cure"
has been banished from the vocabulary of therapy; instead, the thera-
pist speaks of "growth" or "progress." Since the goals are indistinct,
the end point of therapy is similarly blurred, and courses of therapy of-
ten continue aimlessly year after year.
   The atrophy of structure-providing social (and psychological) insti-
tutions in our lives has served to confront us with our freedom. If there
are no rules, no grand designs, nothing we must do, then we are free to
do as we choose. Our basic nature has not changed; one might say that,
with the stripping away of freedom-concealing diversions, with the de-
constitution of externally imposed structure, we are today closer than
ever to experiencing the existential facts of life. But we are unprepared;
it is too much to bear, anxiety clamors for release, and, at both individ-
ual and social levels, we engage in a frenetic search to shield ourselves
from freedom.
   Let me turn now to an examination of the specific psychic defenses
that protect the individual from responsibility awareness. No therapist
goes through a day of clinical work without encountering several ex-
amples of responsibility-avoiding defenses. I shall discuss some of the
more common ones: compulsivity, displacement of responsibility to an-
other, denial of responsibility ("innocent victim," "losing control"),
avoidance of autonomous behavior, and decisional pathology.
224


6 I Responsibility
COMPULSIVITY
   One of the more common dynamic defenses against responsibility
awareness is the creation of a psychic world in which one does not ex-
perience freedom but exists under the sway of some irresistible ego-
alien ("not-me") force. We call this defense "compulsivity."
   A clinical illustration of it is provided by Bernard, a twenty-five-
year-old salesman whose major problems centered on guilt and "driv-
enness." He was driven in his sexual behavior, in his work, and even
in his leisure. He was the man who (in the example in the introduction
to Part II), upon failing to arrange a sexual liaison (he had deliberately
phoned too late), breathed a sigh of relief: "Now I can read and get a
good night's rest which is what I really wanted all along." In that re-
markable phrase-"which is what I really wanted all along" -lies the
crux of Bernard's problem. The obvious question is, "Why, Bernard, if
this is what you really want, did you not simply do that directly?"
   Bernard answered that query in several ways: "I didn't know that
was what I really wanted until I felt the wave of relief that came over
me when the last woman refused me." At another time he stated, in ef-
fect, that he was unaware there was a choice involved: "Making a
woman is what it's all about." The drive was so compelling that it was
unthinkable for him not to bed an available woman, even though it
was perfectly clear that the brief sexual exhilaration was heavily
outweighed by the associated dysphoria: anticipatory anxiety, feelings
of self-dissatisfaction because his sexual ruminations reduced his effec-
tiveness at work, guilt and fear that his sexual promiscuity would be
discovered by his wife, self-contempt because of his awareness that he
acted in bad faith by using women as one would use a machine.
   Bernard, then, avoided the problem of responsibility and choice by a
compulsivity that obliterated choice; his subjective experience was
similar to hanging on for dear life to a frenzied, uncontrollable bronco.
He sought therapy to find relief from his dysphoria but was blind to
the fact that at some level he was responsible for having created his
dysphoria, his compulsivity-in short, for having created every aspect
of his life predicament.
DISPLACEMENT OF RESPONSIBILITY
   Many individuals avoid personal responsibility by displacing it to
another. This maneuver is exceptionally common in the psychotherapy
situation. One of the major themes in my work with Bernard was his
effort to shift the burden of responsibility from himself to me. He did
not think about his problem from one session to the other; instead, he
                                                                      225


                                                          II I FREEDOM
merely stored up the material and "dumped" it in my lap. (He coun-
tered this observation with the cunning rejoinder that if he "pro-
cessed" the material beforehand, spontaneity would be stripped from
the sessions.) He rarely produced dreams, because he could not will
himself to write down the dreams during brief awakenings in the
night, and by morning he had forgotten them. On the rare occasions
when he did write down a dream, he never once looked at the dream
between the time of writing it and his session; consequently, he often
could no longer decipher his own script.
   During a summer break when I was away on vacation he "marked
time" waiting for my return and dreamed, the night before we re-
sumed, that he was at a football game and watching himself perched
upon my shoulders catching a touchdown pass. His behavior during that
first session was a symbolic re-enactment of the dream: he deluged me
with detailed accounts of his summer anxieties, guilt, sexual behavior,
and self-deprecation. He had for four weeks given in to his compulsi-
vity and anxiety, waiting for me to return to show him how to take a
stand against them. Though he had often used brain-storming exercises
in his work, he seemed dismayed when I suggested a simple exercise
for him (reflecting on himself for twenty minutes and then writing
down his observations). After a few (fruitful) attempts he "could not
find the time" for the exercise. After a session in which I persisted in
pointing out how he dumped his problems on me, he dreamed:
       A man X [an individual who resembled Bernard-obviously a double]
       called me for an appointment. He said I had known his mother and that
       he, himself, now wanted to see me. I felt I didn't want to see him. I then
       thought that since he was in public relations maybe I ought to think of
       what I can get from him. But then we couldn't work out a meeting time;
       our schedules were incompatible. I said to him, "Perhaps we ought to
       schedule a meeting to talk about your schedule!" I woke up laughing.
   Bernard drove fifty miles to see me and never once felt burdened by
the long commute. Yet, as the dream clearly illustrates, he could not
and would not find the time for a session with himself. Obviously for
Bernard, and for every patient who will not work in the absence of the
therapist, it is not a matter of time or convenience. What is at stake is
the facing of one's own person?.! responsibility for one's life and one's
process of change. And always lurking beyond that awareness of re-
sponsibility is the dread of groundlessness.
   The assumption of responsibility is a precondition of therapeutic
change. As long as one believes that one's situation and dysphoria are
produced by someone else or by some external force, then what sense
is there in committing oneself to personal change? People show inde-
226


6 I Responsibility
fatigable ingenuity in finding ways to avoid awareness of responsibil-
ity. One patient, for example, complained of severe, long-standing sex-
ual problems in his marriage. I believe that by facing his responsibility
for his situation he would have had a frightening confrontation with
freedom and discovered that he was locked up in a prison of his own
creation. In fact he was free, if sex were important enough, to leave his
wife or find another woman, or to consider leaving his wife (the mere
thought of separation was sufficient to propel him into paroxysms of
anxiety). He was free to change any aspect of his sexual life; and that
fact, too, was momentous, because it meant that he would have to as-
sume the responsibility of a life-long stifling of his sexual feelings and
many other aspects of his affective life as well. Consequently he dog-
gedly avoided facing responsibility and attributed the sexual problems
to a number of factors outside of himself: that is, to his wife's sexual
lack of interest and her disinclination to change; to squeaky bedsprings
(so noisy that the children would overhear the sounds of coitus, and,
for many absurd reasons, the bed could not be replaced); to his aging
(he was forty-five) and innate libidinal deficit; to his unresolved prob-
lems with his mother (which, as is so often true for genetic explana-
tions, served more as apologia for responsibility avoidance than as cata-
lyst for change).
   Other modes of displacing responsibility are commonly seen in clini-
cal practice. Paranoid patients obviously displace responsibility to oth-
er individuals and forces. They disown and attribute to others their
own feelings and desires and invariably explain their dysphoria and
failures as the result of external influence. The major, and often impos-
sible, therapeutic task with paranoid patients is to help them accept
authorship of their projected feelings.
   The avoidance of responsibility is also the major obstacle in the psy-
chotherapy of the patient with a psychophysiological illness. The as-
sumption of responsibility in these patients is twice removed: they ex-
perience somatic rather than psychological distress; and even when
they recognize the psychological substrate to their somatic distress,
they still characteristically employ externalization defenses attributing
their psychological dysphoria to "bad nerves" or to adverse work or
environmental conditions.
DENIAL OF RESPONSIBILITY: INNOCENT VICTIM
A particular type of responsibility avoidance is often seen in individ-
uals (generally thought of as hysterical personalities) who deny re-
sponsibility by experiencing themselves as innocent victims of events
that they themselves have (unwittingly) set into motion.
                                                                       227


                                                     II I FREEDOM
   For example, Clarissa, a forty-year-old practicing psychotherapist,
entered a therapy group to work on her long difficulties in developing
intimate relationships. She had particularly severe problems in relating
to men who, beginning with a brutal, punitive father, characteristically
rejected and punished her. During our initial intake session she told
me that several months previously she had terminated a lengthy psy-
choanalysis, and that she now felt that her problems would be better
dealt with in a group setting. After several months in the group she in-
formed us that she had re-entered analysis shortly after beginning the
group but had not considered it of sufficient import to report to the
group. At this point, however, her analyst, who strongly disapproved
of group therapy, interpreted her membership in a therapy group, as
"acting-out."
   It is obvious that a patient cannot work in a therapy group if his or
her individual therapist opposes and undermines the work. I attempt-
ed, at Clarissa's suggestion, to communicate with her analyst, but he
elected to maintain a psychoanalytic posture of total confidentiality
and-somewhat haughtily, I thought-refused even to converse with
me about the matter. I felt betrayed by Clarissa, irritated with her ana-
lyst, and dazed by the turn of events. Throughout, Clarissa remained
ingenuous and slightly bewildered at the confusing events occurring
to her. The group members viewed her as "playing dumb"; and, in an
effort to help her see her role in these events, they became increasingly
forceful, almost punitive, in their comments. Clarissa felt once again
victimized, especially by men, and "due to circumstances beyond her
control" was forced to leave the group.
   This incident was a miniature version of Clarissa's core problem: an
avoidance of responsibility, which she accomplished by playing the
role of innocent victim. Though she was not yet prepared to see it, the
incident held the key to her difficulties in establishing intimate rela-
tionships. Two important men in her life, her analyst and her group
therapist, felt manipulated and, speaking for myself, annoyed with her.
The other group members felt similarly used. She did not relate to
them in good faith; but instead, they felt they were mere pawns in a
drama she was enacting with her therapists.
   Recall that Clarissa entered therapy because of her problems in de-
veloping intimate relationships. Her responsibility for these difficul-
ties was crystal clear in the group. She was never with a person. While
next to the group members, she was with me. While next to me, she
was with her analyst; and, no doubt, when next to him, she was with
her father. Clarissa's dynamics of innocent victimhood were especially
228


6 I Responsibility
obvious because she was herself an experienced psychotherapist, had
led therapy groups, and well knew the importance of communication
between individual and group therapists.
DENIAL OF RESPONSIBILITY: LOSING CONTROL
   Another mode of shucking responsibility is to be temporarily "out of
one's mind." Some patients enter a temporary irrational state in which
they may act irresponsibly, for they are not accountable, even to them-
selves, for their behavior. It was this problem that, in one of the exam-
ples at the beginning of Part II, the therapist addressed when he asked
a patient (who was lamenting that her behavior was not deliberate),
"Whose unconscious is it?" It is important to note that careful examina-
tion of such patients will reveal to a therapist that the "losing control"
behavior is by no means disorderly: it is purposeful and offers the pa-
tient both secondary gains ("payoffs") and a self-deceptive avoidance
of responsibility.
   A patient who was brutalized and then rejected by an insensitive, sa-
distic lover, "lost control," and by "going crazy" radically changed the
balance of control in the relationship. She followed him around for
weeks, repeatedly broke into and vandalized his apartment, created
scenes by screaming and throwing dishes when he was dining in res-
taurants with friends. Her crazy, unpredictable behavior defeated him
utterly: he panicked, sought protection from the police, and eventually
required emergency psychiatric care. At this point, her goal accom-
plished, she-mirabile dictu-regained control and behaved thenceforth
in an entirely rational manner. In muted form this dynamic is by no
means uncommon. Many an individual is tyrannized by the potential
irrationality of a partner.
   Losing control offers another common payoff: nurturance. Some pa-
tients so deeply crave to be nursed, to be fed, to be cared for in the most
intimate ways by their therapist that to gain those ends, they "lose con-
trol" even to the point of deep regression requiring hospitalization.
AVOIDANCE OF AUTONOMOUS BEHAVIOR
   Therapists are often baffled by patients who know very well what
they can do to help themselves feel better but inexplicably refuse to
take that step. Paul, a patient who was depressed and in the process of
changing jobs, went to New York for job interviews. He felt desperate-
ly lonely: the interviews themselves filled only six hours of a three-day
period, and the rest of the time was spent in lonely, frenzied waiting.
Having in the past lived many years in New York, Paul had many
                                                                        229


                                                       II I FREEDOM
friends th€re, whose presence would have no doubt heartened him. He
spent two lonely nights looking at the telephone, wishing they would
call-an impossibility since they had no way of knowing he was in
town. Yet he could not pick up the telephone to call them.
   Why? We analyzed this at length beginning with such explanations
as "no energy," "too humiliated to ask for company," "they'd feel I
only call them when I need them." Only gradually did we understand
that his behavior was a reflection of his unwillingness to recognize
that his well-being and his comfort rested in his own hands, and that
help would not come unless he acted to create that help. At one point I
commented that it was frightening to be one's own father; that phrase
reverberated powerfully for Paul, and during subsequent therapy he
often referred back to it. The paradox for him (as for Sam, in chapter 4,
who, after his wife left him, would not go out and search for friends
lest he miss an incoming phone call) was that to alter his social loneli-
ness, he had to encounter a deeper existential loneliness. In these ex-
amples we see the confluence of two frames of reference: the assump-
tion of responsibility results also in the relinquishment of one's belief
in the existence of the ultimate rescuer-an exceedingly difficult task
for an individual who has constructed his Weltanschauung around that
belief. These two frames of reference acting in concert constitute the
basic dynamics of dependency and provide the therapist with a coher-
ent and powerful explanatory system by which to understand the
pathologically dependent character.
DISORDERS OF WISHING AND DECIDING
   The next chapter will discuss in depth the relationship between re-
sponsibility assumption and willing (that is, wishing and deciding),
and I need pause only briefly here to note that when one in full aware-
ness wishes and decides, one is confronted with responsibility. The
central thesis of this chapter is that one creates oneself; the central the-
sis of the next is that wishing and deciding are the building blocks of
creation. As Sartre has often told us, an individual's life is constituted
by his or her choices. An individual wills himself into being what he
is. If one is terrified by self-constitution (and by the groundlessness in-
herent in such knowledge), then one may avoid willing by, for exam-
ple, deadening oneself to wishing or feeling, by abdicating choice, or
by transferring one's choice to other individuals, institutions, or exter-
nal events. In chapter 7 I shall consider these mechanisms of responsi-
bility avoidance through willing-denial.
230


6 I Responsibility
           Responsibility Assumption and Psychotherapy
To assist the patient in assuming responsibility, the therapist's first step
is not a technique but the adoption of an attitude upon which subse-
quent technique will rest. The therapist must continually operate with-
in the frame of reference that a patient has created his or her own dis-
tress. It is not chance, or bad luck or bad genes, that has caused a patient
to be lonely, isolated, chronically abused, or insomniac. The therapist
must determine what role a particular patient plays in his or her own
dilemma, and find ways to communicate this insight to the patient. Un-
til one realizes that one has created one's own dysphoria, there can be
no motivation to change. If one continues to believe that distress is
caused by others, by bad luck, by an unsatisfying job-in short, by
something outside oneself-why invest energy in personal change? In
the face of such a belief system, the obvious strategy is not therapeutic
but activist: to change one's environment.
   Readiness to accept responsibility varies considerably from patient to
patient. For some patients it is extraordinarily difficult and constitutes
the bulk of the therapeutic task; once they assume responsibility, thera-
peutic change almost automatically and effortlessly transpires. There
are others who recognize responsibility more quickly but balk repeat-
edly at other stages of treatment. Generally responsibility awareness
does not proceed evenly on a unified front, individuals may accept re-
sponsibility on some issues and deny it on others.
IDENTIFICATION AND LABELING
   The first task of the therapist is to be attentive to the issue, to identi-
fy instances and methods of responsibility avoidance and to make these
known to the patient. Therapists, depending on stylistic preference,
use a vast variety of techniques to focus a patient's attention on respon-
sibility. Take several of the examples at the beginning of Part II: A
therapist who counters a patient's excuse for behavior ("It was not de-
liberate. I did it unconsciously.") with the question "Whose uncon-
scious is it?" is encouraging responsibility awareness. As is the thera-
pist who asks a patient to "own" what happens to him or her: (not "he
bugs me," but "I let him bug me.") The "can't" bell, which summons
individuals to change "cannot" into "will not," is a ploy designed to
enhance the awakening of responsibility. As long as one believes in
"can't," one remains unaware of one's active contribution to one's situ-
ation. The patient instructed to say, "I will not change, mother, until
                                                                           231


                                                           II I FREEDOM
you treat me differently when I was ten years old" is in effect being
asked to ponder her refusal (rather than her inability) to change. Fur-
thermore, she is confronted with the absurdity of her situation and
with her tragic and futile sacrifice of a life upon the altar of
spitefulness.
   Vera Gatch and Maurice Temerlin studied audiotapes of psychother-
apy sessions and report a potpourri of confrontative (at times insensi-
tively so) interventions designed to enhance responsibility awareness:
        When one man complained, bitterly and passively, that his wife would
        not have sexual intercourse with him, a therapist clarified the implicit
        choice with the remark, "You must like her that way; you've been mar-
        ried to her a long time." A housewife complained, "I cannot manage my
        child, all he does is sit and watch TV all day." The therapist explicated
        the implicit choice with: "And you're too little and helpless to turn off
        the TV." An impulse-ridden, obsessional man cried: "Stop me, I'm afraid
        I'm going to kill myself." The therapist said: "I should stop you? If you
        really want to kill yourself-to actually die-nobody can stop you-ex-
       cept you." Interacting with a passive, oral-dependent man who felt that
        life held nothing for him because he suffered from the unrequited love
       of an older woman, one therapist began singing, "Poor little lamb that
        has lost its way."' 0
The general principle is obvious: whenever the patient laments about
his or her life situation, the therapist inquires how the patient has cre-
ated this situation.
   It is often helpful if the therapist keeps the patient's initial com-
plaints in mind and, at appropriate points in therapy, juxtaposes these
complaints with the latter's in-therapy attitudes and behavior. For ex-
ample, consider a patient who sought therapy because of feelings of
isolation and loneliness. During therapy he discussed his sense of su-
periority and his scorn and disdain of others. His resistance to chang-
ing these attitudes was significant: they were ego-syntonic and dog-
gedly maintained. The therapist helped the patient understand his
responsibility for his uncomfortable predicament by commenting,
whenever the patient discussed his scorn of others, "And you are
lonely."
   A patient who resents the restriction in his or her life, must be
helped to appreciate how he or she has contributed to that situation:
for example, by choosing to stay married, to hold two jobs, to keep
three dogs, to maintain a formal garden, and so forth. Generally one's
life becomes so structured that one begins to consider it as a given, as a
concrete structure that one must inhabit, rather than as a web, spun by
232


6 I Responsibility
oneself, which could be spun again in any number of ways. This is
why, I am sure, that Otto Will said to his constricted, obsessive patient
"Why don't you change your name and move to California?" He con-
fronted the patient forcefully with his freedom; with the fact that he
really was free to change the structure of his life-to constitute it in an
entirely different way.
   Of course, there is a ready rejoinder: "There are many things that
cannot be changed." One must earn a living, one must be father or
mother to one's children, one must fulfill one's moral obligations. One
must accept one's limitations: a paraplegic has no freedom to walk; a
poor man no freedom to retire; an aging widow may have little possi-
bility to marry; and so on. This objection-a fundamental objection to
the concept of human freedom-may arise at any stage of therapy and
is so important that I shall consider it at length in a separate section
(pages 268-76).
   Though there is a place for these techniques of labeling , and under-
scoring responsibility, there is a limit to their therapeutic effectiveness.
"Can't" bells or slogans like "Take charge of your life" or "Own your
feelings" are often arresting, but most patients require more than ex-
hortation, and therapists must employ methods that have a deeper im-
pact. The most potent methods available to therapists involve analyz-
ing the patient's current (here-and-now) in-therapy behavior and
demonstrating that the patient recreates microcosmically, in the ther-
apy situation, the same situation that he or she faces in life. Indeed, as I
shall discuss, psychotherapy may be structured specifically for the pur-
pose of illuminating the patient's awareness of responsibility.
RESPONSIBILITY AND THE HERE-AND-NOW
   The therapist who attempts to analyze a patient's narrative in an ef-
fort to demonstrate the latter's responsibility for a life situation often
wanders into quicksand. The patient says sotto voce, 'This is all very
well. He can sit there in his comfortable office and tell me I got myself
into this, but he doesn't really know what a sadistic bully my husband
is" (or "what an impossible boss I have," or "how really overwhelming
my compulsion is," or "what it's really like in the business world," or
any other of an unlimited number of unsurmountable obstacles). There
are no limits to this resistance because, as every experienced therapist
knows, the patient is not an objective observer of his or her own life
predicament. The patient may use externalizing mechanisms of de-
fense or, in a number of other ways, distort the data to fit his or her as-
sumptive world. Thus, it is only on rare occasions that the therapist can
                                                                        233


                                                      II I FREEDOM
facilitate responsibility assumption by working solely with second-
hand data.
   Leverage is vastly increased if the therapist works with first-hand
material that manifests itself in the here-and-now of treatment. By fo-
cusing on experiences that have transpired in the therapy situation, ex-
periences in which he or she has participated, the therapist may help
the patient examine the latter's own responsibility for nascent behav-
ior-before it becomes encrusted and obscured by mechanisms of de-
fense. The therapeutic impact is considerably increased if the therapist
selects an incident or an aspect of behavior, with obvious similarities to
the problem that brought the patient to therapy.
   A patient, Doris, provides a clinical illustration. She sought therapy
because of severe anxiety centering largely upon her relationship with
males. Her major problem, as she described it, was to involve herself in
relationships to abusive men from which she was unable to extricate
herself. Her father had abused her as had her first husband, her current
husband, and a long string of employers. Her account of her difficulty
was persuasive, and my inclination was to empathize with Doris for
having been so ill fated as to be thrown time and time again into the
clutches of tyrannical bastards. She had been in a therapy group for
several months when she had a severe anxiety storm. Unable to wait
until the next group meeting, she called me one morning for an emer-
gency individual appointment. With considerable difficulty I rear-
ranged my schedule and agreed to see her at 3:00P.M. that afternoon. At
twenty minutes to three she called and left a message canceling the ap-
pointment. A few days later, in the group meeting, I inquired what had
happened. She replied that she had felt slightly better that afternoon,
and since my rule was that I would see a group member for an individ-
ual hour only once during the entire course of therapy, she had decid-
ed to save her hour for a time when she might need it even more.
   Now I never made such a rule! I would never refuse to see a patient
in an emergency. Nor had any of the group members heard me make
any statement to that effect. But Doris was convinced I had told it to
her. She chose to recall other incidents of our relationship in a highly
selective fashion. For example, she remembered with astonishing clar-
ity a single, impatient comment that I had once made to her months be-
fore (about her monopolistic tendencies), and she frequently repeated
it in the group. However, she had forgotten many positive supportive
statements I had made to her in subsequent months.
   Doris's interaction with me in the microcosm of the here-and-now
was representative of her relationship with men and illuminated her
234


6 I Responsibility
role (that is, her responsibility) in her life situation. She distorted her
perception of me in the same way that she distorted her perception of
other men-that is, by seeing us all as authoritarian and uncaring. But
there was still more to be learned from the incident. I felt annoyed
with Doris for canceling the appointment at the last moment, after I
had made such an effort to clear the time for her. I felt irritated, too, at
her insistence, even though seven other members disagreed with her,
that I had voiced a "rule" about only one individual session. With some
effort I tempered my irritation and maintained my therapeutic objec-
tivity, but I could easily imagine how difficult it would be to relate to
Doris in a nontherapeutic real-life situation.
   In essence, then, what happened was that Doris had certain beliefs
about men, certain expectancies about how they would behave toward
her. These expectancies distorted her perception, and perceptual dis-
tortion resulted in her behaving in ways that elicited the very behavior she
dreaded. This maneuver, the "self-fulfilling prophecy," is common: the
individual first expects a certain event to occur, then behaves in such a
way as to bring the prophecy to pass, and finally relegates awareness of
his or her behavior to the unconscious.
   This incident was crucial in Doris's therapy because it had such far-
reaching implications for her basic problem. If she could understand
and accept her responsibility for the way she related to me, then it was
only a short step, requiring minimal generalization, for her to become
aware of her responsibility for her mode of relating to other men in her
life. The therapist should, I believe, seize such an incident and hang on
to it with tenacity. I label it explicitly and underscore its importance:
"Doris, I believe what just happened between you and me is exceeding-
ly important because it gives us an important clue to some of the prob-
lems that exist between you and men in your life." If the patient is not
yet prepared to accept the interpretation, repeat it in the future when
there is additional corroborative evidence or when the therapist-pa-
tient relationship is more solid.
   Awareness of one's own feelings constitute a therapist's most impor-
tant instrument for identifying a patient's contribution to his or her
life predicament. For example, a depressed forty-eight-year-old woman
complained bitterly about the way her children treated her. They dis-
missed her opinions, dealt with her in cavalier fashion, and, when
some serious issue was at stake, addressed their comments to their fa-
ther. I tuned into my feelings about her and became aware of a whin-
ing quality in her voice which tempted me not to take her seriously
and to treat her as a child. Sharing my feeling with the patient was
                                                                        235


                                                      II I FREEDOM
enormously useful to her: it helped her become aware of her childlike
behavior in many areas. The analysis of the here-and-now (her whin-
ing) was extremely important in helping her to solve the puzzle of her
children's treatment of her. After all, they merely followed her instruc-
tions: they treated her precisely as she asked to be treated (that is, asked
nonverbally through whining, through her excuses based on weak-
ness, and through her helpless depression).
   Not only is the patient's responsibility avoidance recapitulated in the
patient therapist relationship, but it is also re-enacted in the patient's
basic posture toward therapy. Patients, often with the silent collusion
of the therapist, may settle comfortably, passively, and permanently
into therapy, expecting little to happen or, if anything is to happen,
that it will come from the therapist.
   A therapist who has a sense of being heavily burdened by a patient,
who is convinced that nothing useful will transpire in the hour unless
he or she brings it to pass, has allowed that patient to shift the burden
of responsibility from his or her own shoulders to those of the thera-
pist. Therapists may deal with this process in a number of ways. Most
therapists choose to reflect upon it. The therapist may comment that
the patient seems to dump everything in his or her (the therapist's) lap,
or that he or she (the therapist) does not experience the patient as ac-
tively collaborating in therapy. Or the therapist may comment upon
his or her sense of having to carry the entire load of therapy. Or the
therapist may find that there is no more potent mode of galvanizing a
sluggish patient into action than by simply asking, "Why do you
come?"
   There are several typical resistances on the part of patients to these
interventions, and they center on the theme of "I don't know what to
do," or "If I knew what to do, I wouldn't need to be here," or "That's
why I'm coming to see you," or "Tell me what I have to do." The pa-
tient feigns helplessness. Though insisting that he or she does not
know what to do, the patient has in fact received many explicit and im-
plicit guidelines from the therapist. But the patient does not disclose
his or her feelings; the patient cannot remember dreams (or is too tired
to write them down, or forgets to put paper and pencil by the bed); the
patient prefers to discuss intellectual issues or to engage the therapist
in a never-ending discussion of how therapy works. The problem, as
every experienced therapist knows, is not that the patient does not
know what to do. Each of these gambits reflects the same issue: the pa-
tient refuses to accept responsibility for change just as, outside the ther-
apy hour, he or she refuses to accept responsibility for an uncomfort-
able life predicament.
236


6 I Responsibility
   Ruth, a patient in a therapy group, illustrates this point. She avoided
responsibility in every sphere of her life. She was desperately lonely,
she had no close women friends, and all of her relationships with
males had failed because her dependency needs were too great for her
partners. More than three years of individual therapy had proved inef-
fective. Her individual therapist reported that Ruth seemed like a "lead
weight" in therapy: she produced no material aside from circular ru-
mination about her dilemmas with men, no fantasies, no transference
material, and, over a three-year span, not a single dream. In despera-
tion, her individual therapist had referred her to a therapy group. But
in the group Ruth merely recapitulated her posture of helplessness and
passivity. After six months she had done no work in the group and
made no progress.
   In one crucial meeting she bemoaned the fact that she had not been
helped by the group, and announced that she was wondering whether
this was the right group or the right therapy for her.
          Therapist: Ruth, you do here what you do outside the group. You wait
       for something to happen. How can the group possibly be useful to you if
       you don't use the group?
          Ruth: I don't know what to do. I come here every week and nothing
       happens. I get nothing out of therapy.
          Therapist: Of course you get nothing out of it. How can something
       happen until you make it happen?
          Ruth: I feel "blanked out" now. I can't think of what to say.
          Therapist: It seems important for you never to know what to say or do.
          Ruth: (crying) Tell me what you want me to do. I don't want to be like
       this all my life. I went camping this weekend-all the other campers
       were in seventh heaven, everything was in bloom and I spent the whole
       time in complete misery.
          Therapist: You want me to tell you what to do, even though you have
      a good idea of how you can work better in the group.
          Ruth: If I knew, I'd do it.
          Therapist: On the contrary! It seems very frightening for you to do
       what you can do for yourself.
          Ruth: (sobbing) Here I am again in the same shitty place. My mind is
      scrambled eggs. You're irritated with me. I feel worse, not better in this
      group. I don't know what to do.
At this point the rest of the group joined in. One of the members reso-
nated with Ruth, saying he was in the same situation. Two others ex-
pressed their annoyance at her eternal helplessness. Another comment-
ed, accurately, that there had been endless discussions in the group
about how members could participate more effectively. (In fact, a long
segment of the previous meeting had been devoted to that very issue.)
                                                                            237


                                                      II I FREEDOM
She had innumerable options, another told her. She could talk about
her tears, her sadness, or about how hurt she was. Or about what a
stern bastard the therapist was. Or about her feelings toward any of the
other members. She knew, and everyone knew that she knew, these
options. "Why," the group wondered, "did she need to maintain her
posture of helplessness and pseudo dementia?"
   Thus galvanized, Ruth said that for the last three weeks during her
commuting to the group she had made a resolution to discuss her feel-
ings toward others in the group, but always reneged. Today she said
she wanted to talk about why she never attended any of the post-group
coffee klatches. She had wanted to participate but had not done so be-
cause she was reluctant to get any closer to Cynthia (another member
of the group) lest Cynthia, whom she saw as exceptionally needy,
would begin phoning her in the middle of the night for help. Follow-
ing an intense interaction with Cynthia, Ruth openly showed her feel-
ings about two other members of the group and by the end of the ses-
sion had done more work than in the six previous months combined.
What is worth underlining in this illustration is that Ruth's lament,
"Tell me what to do," was a statement of responsibility avoidance. When
sufficient leverage was placed upon her, she knew very well what to
do in therapy. But she did not want to know what to do! She wanted
help and change to come from outside. To help herself, to be her own
mother, was frightening; it brought her too close to the frightening
knowledge that she was free, responsible, and fundamentally alone.
RESPONSIBILITY ASSUMPTION IN GROUP THERAPY
   The concept that therapy is a social microcosm-a setting in which
the patient not only recites but displays his or her psychopathology in
the here-and-now-pertains to all therapy settings (individual, cou-
ples, families, or groups). It is particularly relevant to the group situa-
tion. First, the large number of individuals, eight to ten (including the
therapist or therapists) provides the opportunity for most of the pa-
tient's conflict areas to be ignited. In the individual setting the patient
often encounters, in interaction with the therapist, his or her conflicted
problems surrounding authority or problems relating to parents or to
parental surrogates. But in the group setting the patient encounters so
many others who activate so many different interpersonal issues (sib-
ling rivalry, heterosexuality, homosexuality, competition with peers,
intimacy, self-disclosure, generosity, giving and receiving, and so
forth) that we are justified in considering the therapy group as a minia-
turized social universe for each of its members.
238


6 I Responsibility
  The here-and-now of the small interactional therapy group provides
especially optimal conditions for therapeutic work on responsibility
awareness. One of the most fascinating aspects of group therapy is that
the members are all born simultaneously: each starts out in the group
on an equal footing. Each, in a way that is visible to the other members
and-if the therapist does his job-apparent to himself, gradually
scoops out and shapes a particular life space in the group. Thus, one is
responsible for the interpersonal position one scoops out for oneself in
the group (and, by analogy, in life as well) and for the sequence of
events that will occur to one. The group has many eyes. Members do
not need to accept another's description of how he or she is victimized
by external persons or events. If the group functions at a here-and-now
level (that is, the primary focus is upon experiencing and analyzing in-
termember relationships), then the members will observe how each
creates his own self-victimization-and they will eventually feed these
observations back to each member in turn.
   Though we therapists do not often think of the group process in this
manner, I believe that the major activities of the group, especially in
the initial stages of therapy, are directed toward each member's becom-
ing aware of personal responsibility. Why do we encourage members
to be direct and honest in the group (that is, to be themselves)? Why do
we encourage feedback? Why do we encourage members to share their
impressions and feelings for the other members? I believe that the
group therapist-often without necessarily being aware of doing so-
attempts to escort each patient through the following sequence:
    1. Patients learn how their behavior is viewed by others. Through feedback and,
       later, through self-observation, patients learn to see themselves through
       others' eyes.
    2. Patients learn how their behavior makes others feel.
    3. Patients learn how their behavior creates the opinions others have of them.
       Members learn that, as a result of their behavior, others value them, dis-
       like them, find them unpleasant, respect them, avoid them, exploit them,
       fear them, and so on.
    4. Patients learn how their behavior influences their opinion of themselves. Build-
       ing on the information gathered in the first three steps, patients formu-
       late self-evaluations; they make judgments about their self-worth and
       their lovability, and they learn how their behavior leads to these
       judgments.
   Each step begins with the patient's own behavior and attempts to
demonstrate the repercussions of that behavior. The end point of this
sequence is that the group member apprehends that one is oneself re-
                                                                                  239


                                                      II I FREEDOM
sponsible for how others see one, treat one, and regard one. Further-
more, one is also responsible for the manner in which one regards one-
self. That one's group experience is a microcosm of one's life
experience is an obvious and compelling fact; and in my experience pa-
tients have no difficulty generalizing assumption of individual respon-
sibility from in-group situations to life situations. Once having reached
this point, a patient has entered the vestibule of change; and the thera-
pist then embarks on the venture of facilitating the process of willing,
as I shall discuss in the next chapter.
   The interactional therapy group enhances responsibility assumption
not only by making members aware of their personal contribution to
their unsatisfying life situations but also by accentuating each mem-
ber's role in the conduct of the group. The underlying principle is that
if members assume responsibility for the functioning of the group,
then they become aware that they have the ability (and the obligation)
to assume responsibility in all spheres of life.
   The effective therapy group is one in which the members themselves
are the primary agents of help. As patients look back over a successful
therapy group experience, they rarely attribute their improvement di-
rectly to the therapist: either to specific comments by the therapist or to
their overall relationship with the therapist. Instead, patients generally
cite some aspect of their relationships with other members: either sup-
port, conflict and resolution, acceptance or, often, the experience of
having been helpful to others. The leader-centered group fails to foster
such events, and in it often all hope and all help are seen as emanating
from the leader. (Such leader-centered approaches as Gestalt therapy
groups and transactional analytic groups fail, in my opinion, to take
full advantage of the therapeutic potential inherent in the group
format.)
   It is important, therefore, that the group leader be aware that his or
her task is to create a social system-a system in which the group and
the members themselves are the agents of change. The leader must be
acutely sensitive to the location of responsibility in the group. If he or
she looks forward with dismay to the therapy group meetings and ends
each one feeling drained and fatigued, then it is clear that something
has gone seriously wrong in the shaping of an optimal therapeutic cul-
ture. If the leader has the sense that everything depends on him or her,
that if he or she doesn't work nothing will happen in the group, that
the members are moviegoers coming to see what's playing that week,
then the members of the therapy group have successfully transferred
the burden of responsibility onto the shoulders of the therapist.
240


6 I Responsibility
   How does the group therapist help to shape a group that assumes re-
sponsibility for its own functioning? First, the leader must be aware of
being generally the only person in the group who, on the basis of past
experience, has a relatively clear definition in mind of what constitutes
a good work meeting versus a nonwork meeting. The leader must help
the members acquire such a definition and then encourage them to act
accordingly. A number of techniques are available. The leader may use
process checks-breaking into the meeting from time to time and ask-
ing the members to evaluate how the meeting has been going for them
over the past thirty minutes or so. If the meeting has been painfully
lumbering along, the leader may ask them to compare it with a pre-
vious, dynamic session, so that they gradually begin to differentiate
work meetings from nonwork ones. If everyone is in accord that the
meeting has been fruitful and compelling, the leader encourages the
members to fix that session in their minds as a standard with which to
compare subsequent meetings.
   If in response to the leader's question about members' evaluation of
the meeting, a member comments that he or she was involved only for
the first fifteen minutes but then tuned out for the next thirty minutes
after Joe or Mary started talking, the leader may, in a variety of ways,
question why that particular member let the meeting go on in a man-
ner that was personally unrewarding. How could that person have re-
channeled the meeting? The leader may poll the group and, finding
that there was a general consensus that the meeting was unrewarding,
ask, "All of you seem to have known this. Why did you not stop the
meeting and redirect it? Why is it left to me to do what everyone here
is capable of doing?" Many variations in technique are possible, of
course, depending upon the stylistic preferences of the therapist; what
is important is the underlying strategy of encouraging patients to take
responsibility for their lives through the process of taking responsibil-
ity for their therapy.
   Large Group Therapy. The same principle operates in the larger
therapeutic groups. Facilitation of the patient's assumption of personal
responsibility has been a major impetus in the creation of the therapeu-
tic community. Confinement in a psychiatric hospital has always been
an autonomy-stripping experience: patients are deprived of power, of
decision making, of freedom, of privacy, and of dignity. Maxwell Jones
designed the therapeutic community so that the hospital experience
would augment rather than diminish the patient's autonomy. The hos-
pital ward was restructured so that patients had broad responsibility
for their own treatment and their own environment. The patient gov-
                                                                      241


                                                             II I FREEDOM
ernment assumed the rights to decide upon ward rules, furloughs,
ward personnel decisions, and even discharges and medication
regimens.
  A synonym for responsibility assumption is "life management."
Many therapeutic approaches emphasize the teaching of life manage-
ment skills. Inpatient units commonly conduct life management or
"contract" groups in which each patient's "contract" (an agreement to
take over the management of his or her life) is reviewed, and various
contractual issues are discussed. The group may then systematically fo-
cus on what each person can do to take charge of such specific issues as
personal finances, physical health, or social companionship.
RESPONSIBILITY ASSUMPTION AND THE THERAPIST'S STYLE
  Activity and Passivity. The facilitation of responsibility assumption
often poses a dilemma for the therapist. A too-active therapist takes
over for the patient; a passive therapist conveys a sense of powerless-
ness to the patient. The problem is especially pronounced in psychoan-
alytic technique when the analyst's narrow range of behavior and rela-
tive inactivity may foster prolonged dependency. Milton Mazer, an
analyst concerned with this problem, warns that excessive therapist
passivity may discourage the patient's assumption of responsibility:
       ... the analyst's passivity in the presence of the patient's expression of
       helplessness confirms what he chooses to believe, namely, that he is not
       responsible for his actions and therefore may simply follow his im-
       pulses. Hearing no word of warning and no definition of the possible
       consequences, may he not with some justice conclude that he cannot
       help himself, particularly when the conclusion permits him to fulfill the
       aim of his drives?
Mazer warns also that the alternative-excessive activity, either in the
form of guidance or limit setting-may also interfere with the assump-
tion of responsibility: "It is not suggested that the analyst attempt to
forbid the contemplated act, for this would also indicate that the pa-
tient is not to be held responsible and can be curbed only by an outside
force, the authority of the analyst."
   How to steer a middle course? What facilitative posture can the
therapist assume? Mazer suggests that the therapist should attempt to
help the patient recognize this process of choosing:
       ... it is the analyst's job to point out that the patient is in the process of
       deciding whether or not to engage in a particular act, for in so doing he
       clearly outlines the responsibility of the patient for his future. By this
242


6 I Responsibility
       means, the patient is given the opportunity to make a choice between
       neurotic necessity and responsible freedom. If he is able to choose re-
       sponsible freedom, he makes his first cleavage in his neurotic structure."
In other words, the therapist concentrates upon increasing the patient's
awareness that (like it or not) he or she is faced with choice and cannot
escape this freedom.
   Other therapists have sought for more active ways of encouraging re-
sponsibility assumption. Transactional analysts, for example, place
heavy emphasis upon the therapeutic "contract." They devote the ini-
tial sessions not toward establishing a diagnosis (which would merely
accentuate the definition of the therapist-patient relationship as healer-
supplicant) but toward developing a contract. The contract must ema-
nate from the individual rather than from the wishes of others which
have been internalized (in the "parent" ego state) as "shoulds" or
"oughts." Furthermore, the contract must be action-oriented: not "to
understand myself better" but "I want to lose thirty pounds" or "I
want to be able to get an erection with my wife at least once a week."
By setting concrete attainable goals-goals that the patient has de-
fined-and by continuing to call the patient's attention to the relation-
ship between work in therapy and these goals, transactional therapists
hope to increase the patient's sense of responsibility for individual
change.
   Active suggestions on the part of the therapist may, properly em-
ployed, be used to increase awareness. I do not mean here that the
therapist take over for the patient, making decisions and, in short, tell-
ing him or her how to live. However, there are times when the thera-
pist may make a suggestion that seems an obvious behavioral option,
but that the patient, because of a restricted perspective, has never con-
sidered. Thus, the question Why not? may be far more useful than the
question Why? It is not even important that the patient follow the sug-
gestion; the most important message of the procedure may be precisely
that the patient's attention is called to the fact that he or she has never
considered obvious options. Therapy may then proceed to consider the
possibility of choice, the myth of choicelessness, and the feelings
evoked by a confrontation with freedom. The following clinical vi-
gnette is illustrative.
   George was a thirty-year-old successful dentist whose major problem
centered about responsibility avoidance. He had been married once,
but the marriage had failed in general because of his dependent pos-
ture toward his wife and specifically because he had "found himself"
involved with another woman. Since then he had experienced consid-
                                                                             243


                                                     II I FREEDOM
erable torment in regard to his efforts to decide upon remarriage. He
was faced with a decision among several women, all of whom were in-
terested in him, and went to great lengths to induce others-his
friends, his therapist, and the women themselves-to make the deci-
sion for him.
   An episode that illuminated for him his difficulties in assuming re-
sponsibility involved a visit to his parents whom he saw approximately
once a year. His father had always been viewed as the family villain,
and George's relationship to him had always been highly conflicted
and dissatisfying for both. For over a decade their fighting had re-
volved about automobiles. Whenever George returned home, he want-
ed to use one of the family cars, and his father, an automobile mechan-
ic, consistently objected, claiming that he needed the car or that the car
was mechanically malfunctioning. George described his mother as a
powerful woman who controlled every aspect of the family life aside
from the automobiles, the one province where she allowed her hus-
band dominion.
   George anticipated his upcoming visit to his parents with consider-
able trepidation. He anticipated what would happen: he would want to
use the car; his father would object, claiming that the brakes or the tires
were bad, and would then insult him and ask him why couldn't he be a
mensch and rent a car. "What kind of family is that?" George asked. "I
come to see them once a year and they don't care enough even to pick
me up at the airport."
   "Why not rent a car?" I asked him. "Is the idea so outlandish? Why
have you never considered it? After all, you make four times as much
money as your father, are unmarried, and have no outstanding ex-
penses. What would the extra few dollars a day mean to you?" George
seemed startled at my suggestion. As obvious as it was, it was clear that
he had never seriously considered it before. He thought about it and
called his family the next day to tell them when he would be arriving.
George suggested to his mother that he would rent a car, and his moth-
er instantly assured him that the car was fixed now, that his father
would pick him up at the airport, that they much looked forward to
seeing him, and there would be no question about other forms of
transportation.
   The inevitable scene at the airport came to pass. His father greeted
him with "Why didn't you rent a car? Look at that car rental counter.
For eight ninety-five you could have rented a car." They had a loud
embarrassing quarrel. George ran over to the car rental stall, rented a
car, and angrily and self-righteously spurned his father's offer to pay
244


 6 I Responsibility
for it. He and his father went home in separate cars. His father immedi-
ately went into the bedroom and left for work early in the morning.
Since George was there for only a day, he did not see his father again.
   We discussed this incident at great length in therapy. George consid-
ered it a prototypical example of his family interaction and as apologia
for his current state. "As much as this disturbed me now, think of what
it must hav£> been like to grow up in a family like that." It was, George
thought, especially illustrative of why he had such doubts about his
masculinity: consider the model his father constituted, and consider
also how impossible it was to talk to his father.
   I provided an entirely different perspective. How much effort had he
made to speak to his father? Consider his father's position: George's
mother had offered his father's services without consulting him, as
though he were the family butler. His father felt controlled and angry
and attempted to exert himself in his only domain of power-the use
of the car. But what efforts had George made to speak to his father?
Could he not have spoken to his father as well as to his mother on the
phone? What stopped him from simply phoning his father and saying,
"Dad, I'll rent a car at the airport since I need one the next day. I won't
be in till ten o'clock, but please wait up for me so we'll have a chance to
talk." George seemed flabbergasted. "That's impossible!" he exclaimed.
"Why?" "I can't talk to my father on the phone. You just don't know
my family, that's all."
   But George continued to feel a vague sense of guilt about his fa-
ther-about that gray-headed, stubborn old man who had survived a
concentration camp and who for thirty years had gone to work every
day at 6:00 A.M. to put four children through college and graduate
school. "Write him a letter and tell him just how you feel," I suggested.
George once again seemed stunned at my suggestion, as well as an-
noyed with my na'ivete. "That's impossible!" "Why?" I asked. "We
don't write letters. I've never written my father a letter in my life."
"And yet you complain about being alienated from him, about not be-
ing able to communicate with him. If you really want to communicate
with him, then do so. Write him. No one prevents you from doing so.
You can't pass this buck."
   This simple interchange profoundly unsettled George, and that eve-
ning he tremulously and tearfully began to compose a letter to his fa-
ther-a letter that would begin "Dear Dad" and not "Dear Mom and
Dad" or "Dear Folks." As fate would have it, the spirit of freedom and
responsibility stalked his father that same night; and before he had fin-
ished the letter, his father telephoned him to apologize-the first time
                                                                       245


                                                            II I FREEDOM
that his father had ever phoned him. George told his father about the
letter he was writing, and was so moved that he sobbed like a child.
Suffice it to say that things were never the same again between George
and his father, and that an analysis of George's immediate disclaimer
that it was "impossible" to phone his father or to write a letter opened
up rich vistas in therapy.
   Fritz Perls, Gestalt Therapy, and Responsibility Assumption. Of the pro-
ponents of an active therapist style in the approach to responsibility,
none have been more vigorous or inventive than Fritz Peds. Peds's ap-
proach rests on the basic concept that responsibility avoidance must be
recognized and discouraged.
       As long as you fight a symptom, it will become worse. If you take re-
       sponsibility for what you are doing to yourself, how you produce your
       symptoms, how you produce your illness, how you produce your exis-
       tence-the very moment you get in touch with yourself-growth be-
       gins, integration begins."
Peds was acutely sensitive to the patient's use (or avoidance) of the
first-person pronoun and to any switch from active to passive voice:
        We hear the patient first depersonalize himself into "it" and then be-
       come the passive recipient of the vicissitudes of a capricious world. "I
       did this" becomes "It happened." I find that I must interrupt people re-
        peatedly, asking that they own themselves. We cannot work with what
       occurs somewhere else and happens to one. And so I ask that they find
        their way from "It's a busy day" to "I keep myself busy," from "It gets to
        be a long conversation" to "I talk a lot." And so on. 13
   Once Peds had identified the modes of responsibility avoidance, he
then urged the patient to translate helplessness back into unwilling-
ness. The patient was urged to take responsibility for every gesture, ev-
ery feeling, every thought. Perls sometimes used an "I take responsibil-
ity" structured exercise:
        With each statement, we ask patients to use the phrase, " ... and I take
        responsibility for it." For example, "I am aware that I move my leg ...
        and I take responsibility for it." "My voice is very quiet ... and I take re-
        sponsibility for it." "Now I don't know what to say ... and I take re-
        sponsibility for not knowing.""
   Peds asked patients to take responsibility for all of their internal
conflicting forces. If a patient was caught in an agonizing dilemma
and, while discussing it, experienced a knot in his stomach, Peds asked
246


 6 I Responsibility
the patient to have a conversation with the knot. "Place the knot in the
other chair and talk to it. You lay the role of you and the role of the
knot. Give it a voice. What does it say to you?" Thus he asked the pa-
tient to take responsibility for both sides of a conflict in order to be
aware that nothing "happens" to one, that one is the author of every-
thing-of every gesture, every movement, every thought.
       T:  Are you aware of what your eyes are doing?
       P:  Well, now I realize that my eyes keep looking away--
       T:  Can you take responsibility for that?
       P:  --that I keep looking away from you.
       T:  Can you be your eyes now? Write the dialogue for them.
       P:  I am Mary's eyes. I find it hard to gaze steadily. I keep jumping and
           darting about.'"
   We choose each of our symptoms, Perls felt; "unfinished" or unex-
pressed feelings find their way to the surface in self-destructive, unsat-
isfying expressions. (This is the source of the term "Gestalt" therapy.
 Perls attempted to help patients to complete their gestalts-their un-
finished business, their blocked-out awareness, their avoided
 responsibilities.)
   A description of a therapeutic encounter illustrates Perls's approach
to responsibility:
       Two weeks ago I had a wonderful experience-not that it was a cure, but
       at least it was an opening up. This man was a stammerer, and I asked
       him to increase his stammer. As he stammered, I asked him what he feels
       in his throat, and he said, "I feel like choking myself." So, I gave him my
       arm and said, "Now, choke me." "God damn, I could kill you!" he said.
       He got really in touch with his anger and spoke loudly, without any dif-
       ficulties. So, I showed him he had an existential choice, to be an angry
       man or to be a stutterer. And you know how a stutterer can torture you,
       and keep you on tenterhooks. Any anger that is not coming out, flowing
       freely, will turn into sadism, power drive, and other means of torture.'"
   This approach to symptoms-asking the patient to produce or aug-
ment a symptom-is often an effective mode of facilitating responsibil-
ity awareness: by deliberately producing the symptom, in this instance
a stammer, the individual becomes aware that the symptom is his, it is
of his own creation. Though they have not conceptualized it in terms
of responsibility assumption, several other therapists have simulta-
neously arrived at the same technique. Viktor Frankl, for example, de-
scribes a technique of "paradoxical intention" 17 in which a patient is
asked deliberately to increase a symptom, be it an anxiety attack, com-
                                                                               247


                                                     II I FREEDOM
pulsive gambling, fear of a heart attack, or binge eating. Don Jackson,
Jay Haley, Milton Erickson, and Paul Watzlawick have all written on
the same approach, which they label "symptom prescription."' 8
   Perls developed a unique method of working with dreams-a meth-
od ingeniously designed to facilitate the individual's assumption of re-
sponsibility for all his or her mental processes. Throughout most of his-
tory, human beings have considered dreaming as a phenomenon
beyond the realm of personal responsibility. This viewpoint is reflect-
ed in the common idiom: if a person wishes to disclaim an act or
thought, he says, "I wouldn't even dream of it." Before the advent of
Freudian dynamic psychology, dreams were generally considered to be
divine visitations from without or chance occurrences. For example,
one theory suggested that the cells of the cortex slept, and that as the
toxic metabolites of the day were cleaned away, clusters of cells
"awoke" in strictly random patterns. The dream, according to this the-
ory, is comprised by the output of the cells as they awaken: the nonsen-
sical quality of most dreams is, therefore, a function of the adventitious
sequence in which cells are aroused; and an intelligible dream is
formed serendipitously in much the same way that a horde of monkeys
punching at typewriters by chance compose a comprehensible
paragraph.
   Freud argued persuasively that dreams were products of neither
chance nor outside visitation but instead of the conflicting, interacting
components of the personality: the id impulses, the manifest day's resi-
due of the subconscious, the dream censor (an unconscious machinist
of the ego), the conscious ego ("secondary revision"). Though Freud
discovered that the individual-or at least the interplay of these parts
of the individual-was the sole author of the dream, his compartmen-
talization of the psyche resulted, Perls insisted (and quite correctly, I
believe), in personal responsibility's being lost in the component
crevices.
   Perls, who termed the dream "the existential messenger," 19 aimed to
maximize the individual's appreciation of his or her own authorship of
the dream. First, Perls attempted to bring the dream to life by changing
its tense: he asked the patient to repeat the dream in the present tense
and then to re-enact the dream by turning it into a play in which the
patient becomes the director, the props, and the actors. The patient is
asked to play the parts of all the objects in the dream drama. For exam-
ple, I observed Perls working with a patient who dreamed of driving
his car, which began to sputter and finally died altogether. Under
Perl's instruction the patient played multiple parts: the driver, the car,
248


6 I Responsibility
the empty gas tank, the sluggish spark plugs, and so on. By this strate-
gy Perls hoped that the patient could begin to reassemble into a whole
the scattered bits of his personality (that is, to complete the individual
gestalt).
  Responsibility assumption meant to Perls that the individual has to
take responsibility for all his or her feelings, including unpleasant
ones that are often projected upon others.
      We are not willing to take the responsibility that we are critical, so we
      project criticism onto others. We don't want to take the responsibility for
      being discriminating, so we project it outside and then we live in fear of
      being rejected. And one of the most important responsibilities is to take
      responsibility for our projections and become what we project. 20
By reclaiming all previously disowned parts of oneself, the individual's
experience becomes richer: one is at home within oneself and within
one's world.
      Of course, taking responsibility for your life and being rich in experi-
      ence and ability is identical. And what I hope to do is ... to make you
      understand how much you gain by taking responsibility for every emo-
      tion, every movement you make, every thought you have-and shed re-
      sponsibility for anybody else ... 21
Shedding "responsibility for anybody" else is vitally important for the
psychotherapist. Perls was acutely aware of the patient's effort to ma-
nipulate others, especially the therapist, into taking care of him or her.
      The therapist has three immediate tasks: to recognize how the patient
       tries to get support from others rather than to provide his own, to avoid
      getting sucked in and taking care of the patient and to know what to do
      with the patient's manipulative behavior. 22
Not "getting sucked in" is not easy, and the therapist must be accus-
tomed to recognizing and resisting a patient's many and varied means
of persuasion:
      "I can't cope, in this situation, and you can. I 'need' you to show me the
      way, so that I can go on with my life." This is sometimes not much of a
      life at all, but rather an existence which includes a succession of proposi-
      tions submitted by the patient to people who like to take over the man-
      agement of others. The therapist is merely the latest try. Hopefully, "the
      buck stops here." 23
In order to resist being manipulated, Perls took an extreme position on
stopping the buck. He began his workshops in this manner:
                                                                              249


                                                         II I FREEDOM
      So if you want to go crazy, commit suicide, improve, get "turned on," or
      get an experience that will change your life, that's up to you. I do my
      thing and you do your thing. Anybody who does not want to take re-
      sponsibility for this, please do not attend this seminar. You came here
      out of your own free will. I don't know how grown up you are, but the
      essence of a grown-up person is to be able to take responsibility for him-
      self-his thoughts, feelings, and so on ... 2'
Perls's position here is extraordinarily severe and may, especially with
severely disturbed patients, require modification. Many patients re-
quire months of work to become able to assume responsibility, and it is
often unrealistic to make full responsibility assumption a prerequisite
for therapy. Occasional situations arise, however, where the therapist is
well advised to require some degree of responsibility assumption at the
onset of therapy. Many therapists insist that highly suicidal patients
make a "no suicide" pact in which they agree not to attempt suicide for
a specified period of time. Properly used, such an approach can signifi-
cantly diminish suicide risk. 25
  Though Perls's words leave no doubt that he was highly sensitive to
the issue of responsibility and cognizant of the fact that the therapist
must not accept the burden of the patient's responsibility, he was never
able to solve (or for that matter, I believe, to recognize fully) the para-
dox of his approach to therapy. "Assume responsibility" the patient is
told. But what is the rest of the patient's experience? An encounter
with an enormously powerfuL charismatic, wise old man who pro-
nounces nonverbally: "And I'll tell you precisely how, when and why
to do it." Perls's active personal style, his aura of power and omnis-
cience contradicted his words. To receive two simultaneous, conflicting
messages, one explicit and the other implicit, is to be placed in a classi-
cal double bind. Let me describe another therapeutic approach that at-
tempts to avoid that pitfall.
   Helmuth Kaiser and Responsibility Assumption. Of the many therapists
who have confronted the dilemma of how to increase responsibility as-
sumption without at the same time "taking over" for the patient, Hel-
muth Kaiser's contributions stand out for thoughtfulness and consis-
tency. Though both Kaiser and Perls built their approaches to therapy
around the axis of responsibility, the style and the structure of their ap-
proaches were diametrically opposed. Kaiser, who died in 1961, was a
highly inventive therapist who, because he wrote little, has never en-
joyed wide recognition. A book of his collected works was issued in
1965 under the title Effective Psychotherapy. 26 Kaiser believed 'that pa-
250


6 I Responsibility
tients have a universal conflict, a "condition of the mind, common to
all neurotics," 27 which issues from the fact that "mature adulthood en-
tails a complete, a fundamental, an eternal and insurmountable
isolation." 28
   Kaiser tells the story of a medical school chum, Walter, who in the
midst of his studies accepted a role in an amateur dramatic production
and became impassioned with the theater. He was clearly talented and
deliberated abandoning his medical studies and throwing his whole
life into the career of an actor. But how talented was he? Would he be-
come a great actor? Walter agonized over his decision and sought the
opinion of expert after expert. Kaiser observed the torments of his
friend, and suddenly it dawned upon him that Walter was expecting
the impossible. He did not merely want an opinion. He wanted much
more: he wanted someone else to take the responsibility of his deci-
sion.
       In the time that followed, G. [that is, Kaiser] could observe how Walter
       slowly, step by step, discovered that no judgment, no advice from any
       other person could contribute anything to the decision he had to make.
       Feeling compassionate towards Walter's struggle, he was always willing
       to discuss with his friend all the innumerable pros and cons which could
       possibly have a bearing on the step considered. Yet, when they had gone
       through all the possible consequences, had estimated chances, weighed
       indications, sifted information and only the ultimate conclusion was
       missing, they regularly fell into a deep, painful silence. G. then sensed
       Walter's unspoken question, "Now, what do you think?" 29
   What Walter faced, and recoiled from, is a profound human paradox:
we yearn for autonomy but recoil from autonomy's inevitable conse-
quence-isolation. Kaiser called this paradox "mankind's congenital
achilles heel" and said that we would suffer enormously from it if we
did not cover it over with some "magician's trick," some device to deny
isolation. That "magician's trick" is what Kaiser called the "universal
symptom" -a mechanism of defense which denies isolation by soften-
ing one's ego boundaries and fusing with another. Earlier I discussed
fusion or merger as a defense against death anxiety in the description
of man's yearning for an ultimate rescuer. Kaiser reminds us that isola-
tion, and (though he does not explicitly make this point) the ground-
lessness beneath isolation, is a powerful instigator of one's efforts to
fuse with another.
   What events hurl us into a confrontation with isolation? According
to Kaiser, those events that most make one aware that one is entirely
responsible for one's own life-especially the confrontation with a life-
                                                                             251


                                                            II I FREEDOM
altering decision or the development of a conviction that is not sup-
ported by authority. At these times we strive, as did Kaiser's friend
Walter, to find others who will assume responsibility for us.
   Kaiser was exquisitely sensitive to the efforts of the patient to avoid
the isolation of responsibility by transferring executive powers to the
therapist. How can the therapist thwart these efforts of the patient?
Kaiser pondered this question, and posited several approaches but fi-
nally decided that the issue was so important that it must be dealt with
by a modification in the very structure of therapy. To discourage re-
sponsibility transfer, therapy should be entirely unstructured, the thera-
pist entirely nondirective, the patient entirely responsible not only for
the content but for the procedure of therapy. Kaiser declared that "there
should be no rules for the therapist." His description of a therapist-pa-
tient interaction is illustrative:
          P: May I ask what the therapy will consist of? I mean, what is the
       procedure?
          T: The procedure ... ? I am not sure that I understand you fully, but if
       I do, I would say: There is no procedure!
          P: (Smiling politely) Oh, of course, I meant only: What do you want
       me to do?
          T: That is exactly what I thought you meant by "procedure."
          P: I do not understand (20 seconds silence). I mean ... of course, there
       must be something I am supposed to do. Isn't there?
          T: You seem certain that there is something you are supposed to do
       here.
          P: Well, isn't that so?
          T: As far as I am concerned, no.
          P: Well ... I ... I ... I do not understand.
          T: (Smiling) I think you understand what I said but you cannot quite
       believe it.
          P: You are right. I really don't think that you mean it literally.
          T: (after 10 seconds pause) I meant it literally.
          P: (after an uneasy silence of 60 seconds with some effort) Is it all
       right if I say something about my anxiety attacks?
          T: It seems impossible for you to believe that I meant what I said.
          P: I am sorry ... I did not mean to ... but, indeed, I am not sure at all
       that I really ... excuse me, what did you say?
          T: I said: It seems impossible for you to believe that I meant what I
       said.
          P: (shaking his head slightly as if irritated) No, I mean: is it all right
       for me ... (he looks up and when his eyes meet those of the therapist he
       starts laughing.) 30
Kaiser believed that "anything that increases the patient's feeling of re-
sponsibility for his own words must tend to cure him"; and as this il-
252


6 I Responsibility
lustration indicates, he refused even to accept the responsibility of in-
structing the patient how to operate in therapy.
   There are obvious limitations to such extreme technique. I believe
that Perls erred in the direction of supplying too much structure and
energy to the patient, and that Kaiser erred in precisely the opposite di-
rection. No therapist can help a patient who, because of bewilderment,
lack of structure, or lack of confidence, prematurely drops out of ther-
apy. Because the therapist ultimately hopes to assist the patient assume
responsibility, it does not follow that the therapist must demand that
the patient do so at each step, even in the onset of therapy. The thera-
peutic situation usually requires flexibility; often to keep patients in
therapy, therapists must be active and supportive in initial sessions.
Later, once the therapist alliance is welded fast, the therapist may ac-
cent those therapeutic conditions that enhance acceptance of
responsibility.
   Elsewhere Kaiser stresses the importance of the therapeutic relation-
ship and of communicational directness; 31 and no doubt in actual ther-
apy situations he made the necessary adjustments. He wrote an intrigu-
ing play, Emergency, 32 which, in fact, illustrates therapeutic flexibility
par excellence. The protagonist of Emergency, a psychiatrist, Dr. Terwin,
is consulted by Mrs. Porfiri, the wife of a psychiatrist, who states that
her husband is deeply disturbed but refuses to seek help. Dr. Terwin
pretends to be a patient and consults Dr. Porfiri. Gradually, almost im-
perceptibly, he then proceeds under the rubric of "Patient" to treat the
therapist. Obviously Dr. Porfiri was not able to assume responsibility,
not even the responsibility of requesting therapy; and the therapist did
not demand it of him but instead did what all good therapists must do:
he modified the therapy to fit the patient.
 Responsibility Awareness American-Style-Or, How to Take
Charge of Your Own Life, Pull Your Own Strings, Take Care
                     of Number One, and Get It
Responsibility awareness has come of age in America. What once was
the discourse-often obscure-of the professional philosopher and lat-
er the bon mot of the Left Bank avant-garde has become a major consum-
er item in the New World today. Many nationwide best sellers have as
                                                                       253


                                                         II I FREEDOM
their central theme, responsibility assumption. Your Erroneous Zones, to
take one example, has these chapter headings: "Taking Charge of Your-
self," "Choice-Your Ultimate Freedom," "You Don't Need Their Ap-
proval," "Breaking Free from the Past," "Breaking the Barrier of Con-
vention," "Declare Your Independence." 33 The central message of the
book is clearly stated: "Begin to examine your life in the light of
choices you have made or failed to make. This puts all responsibility
for what you are and how you feel on you." 34 Similar books, for exam-
ple, Pulling Your Own Strings/ 5 and Self-Creation 36 have also zoomed
quickly to the top of the best-seller lists.
   Mass consumerism requires that a product be attractive, well pack-
aged, and, most important of all, easily and quickly consumed. Unfor-
tunately these requirements are generally incompatible with the effort
and the thoughtfulness that are needed if one is truly to examine and
alter one's life and world perspective. Thus a "leveling-down" occurs:
we are subjected to exhortation, and best sellers, such as Your Erroneous
Zones, tell us how to "put an end to procrastination":
       Sit down and get started on something you've been postponing. Begin a
       letter or a book. Simply beginning will help you to eliminate anxiety
       about the whole project. ... Give yourself a designated time slot (say
       Wednesday from 10:00 to 10:15 P.M.) which you will devote exclusively
       to the task you've been putting off.... Quit smoking. Now! Begin your
       diet ... this moment! Give up booze ... this second. Put this book down
       and do one push-up as your beginning exercise project. That's how you
       tackle problems ... with action now. Do it! Decide not to be tired until
       the moment before you get into bed. Don't allow yourself to use fatigue
       or illness as an escape or to put off doing anything. 37
Or "rid yourself of dependency":
       Give yourself five-minute goals for how you're going to deal with domi-
       nant people in your life. Try a one-shot "No, I don't want to,'· and test
       the reaction of your reaction in the other person .... Stop taking
       orders! 38
   "Responsibility" has caught the public eye, and professional work-
shops with a responsibility theme have burgeoned across the country.
 For example, a large workshop, called "Taking Charge of Your Own
 Life" (and subtitled "The Psychology of Health Care, The Role of Indi-
 vidual Responsibility") was offered at several locations in 1977-78. It
 included on its program: Rollo May, in a keynote address, on the exis-
 tential struggle toward personal and spiritual freedom; Albert Ellis, on
 his rational-emotive approach to the individual's responsibility for
254


6 I Responsibility
growth and change in the area of sexuality and intimacy; and Arnold
Lazarus, on multimodal therapy-an approach to self-healing de-
scribed in his book "I Can If I Want To." 39 Other topics in the workshop
included behavioral stress-management approach to helping the hard-
driving ("Type-A") patient change behavioral patterns, stress and bio-
feedback, overcoming shyness, Eastern (meditational) approaches to
self-control, and changing "no-change" habit patterns. Of particular
interest is the great diversity of clinical approaches clustered on the
same program. In the past one would not have perceived the common
theme of these various approaches; currently they are grouped togeth-
er under the rubric of "responsibility."
EST
   The mass merchandising of responsibility assumption is nowhere
more evident than in est-the most publicized and commercially suc-
cessful of the growth workshops of the 1970s. Owing to this success
and to its concern with the concept of responsibility, est warrants a par-
ticularly close examination.
   A slickly packaged, mass-produced, enormously profitable, large-
group approach to personal change founded by Werner Erhard, est has
spiraled in a few short years from a one-man operation to a massive or-
ganization. By 1978 it had over 170,000 graduates, and in 1978 it
grossed over nine million dollars, with a paid staff of 300 and a volun-
teer unpaid staff of 7,000; and it includes on its advisory boards promi-
nent business executives, attorneys, university presidents, the former
chancellor of the University of California Medical School, eminent
psychiatrists, government officials, and popular entertainers.
   The est format consists of a large group of individuals (approximate-
ly 250) who spend two weekends listening to a trainer who instructs
them, interacts with them, insults them, shocks them, and guides them
through a number of structured exercises. Though the est packet is a
potpourri of techniques borrowed from such personal growth technol-
ogies as Scientology, Mind Dynamics, encounter groups, Gestalt ther-
apy, and Zen meditation, 40 its primary thrust is assumption of responsibil-
ity. Participants and est leader statements make that crystal clear:
       The leader explained, "Each of us is different because each of us makes
       different choices. It is the inability to choose that keeps us stuck in our
       lives. When you make a choice your life moves forward. The choice usu-
       ally boils down to a simple yes or no. "I don't know" is also a choice-
       the choice to evade responsibility.""
                                                                              255


                                                         II I FREEDOM
   One participant describes her recollections of the workshop in this
manner:
      "When you are responsible," Stuart [the trainer] thundered, "you find
      out you just didn't happen to be lying there on the tracks when the train
      passed through. You are the asshole who put yourself there."
         The theme of responsibility pervades every aspect of the training. In
      fact, if I were to sum up in a few words what I got from the training data
      it would be that we are each the cause of our own experience and re-
      sponsible for everything that happens in our experience.'2
The theme of responsibility assumption is an explicit part of the est
catechism. In this interaction an est trainer argues, and argues effec-
tively, that one is responsible for being mugged:
         "You are each the sole source of your own experience, and thus TO-
      TALLY RESPONSIBLE FOR EVERYTHING YOU EXPERIENCE. When
      you get that, you're going to have to give up ninety percent of the bull-
      shit that's running your lives. Yes, Hank?"
         "Look," says burly Hank, looking quite irritated, "I get that I'm re-
      sponsible for everything I do. I see that. But when I get mugged, there's
      no way I'm gonna accept responsibility for getting mugged."
         "Who's the source of your experience, Hank?"
         "In this case, it would be the mugger."
         "The mugger would take over your mind?"
         "My mind and my wallet!"
         (Laughter)
         "Do you take responsibility for getting out of bed that morning?"
         "Sure"
         "For being on that street?"
         ''Yes"
         "For seeing a man with a gun in his hand?"
         "For seeing him?"
         ''Yes, seeing the mugger."
         "Take responsibility for seeing him?"
         "Yes"
         "Well," says Hank. "I would certainly see him."
         "If you had at that moment no eyes, no ears, nose, or sensations in the
      skin, you wouldn't experience this mugger, would you?"
         "Okay, I get that."
         "That you are responsible for being at that street at that hour with
      money that might be stolen?"
         "Okay, I get that."
         "That you chose not to risk your life by resisting this man and that
      you chose to give up your wallet?"
         "When a guy says give me your money with a gun in his hand, there's
      no choice."
         "Did you choose to be at that place at that time?"
256


6 I Responsibility
          "Yeah, but I didn't choose to have that guy show up."
          "You saw him, didn't you?"
          "Sure."
          "You take responsibility for seeing him, don't you?"
          "For seeing him, yeah."
          "Then get it: EVERYTHING THAT you EXPERIENCE DOESN'T EX-
       IST UNLESS YOU EXPERIENCE IT."
          "EVERYTHING A LIVING CREATURE EXPERIENCES IS CREATED
       UNIQUELY BY THAT LIVING CREATURE WHO IS THE SOLE
       SOURCE OF THAT EXPERIENCE. WAKE UP, HANK!"'"
   Most est graduates, when discussing their gains, emphasize, above
all, the assumption of responsibility. One est graduate stated that peo-
ple
       realized they created their own backaches, migraines, asthma, ulcers and
       other ailments .... Illness doesn't just happen to us. It was remarkable to
       watch person after person get up and admit that they and they alone
       were responsible for their physical ailments. Once these people faced
       the experiences of their life honestly, their ailments vanished."
   In the following interaction an est trainer goes even further and ar-
gues that a man is responsible for his wife's having cancer:
          "How the hell am I responsible for my wife's getting cancer?"
          "You're responsible for creating the experience of your wife's mani-
       festing behavior which you choose to call, by agreement with others, a
       disease called cancer."
          "But I didn't cause the cancer."
          "Look, Fred, I get that what I'm saying is hard for you to fit into your
       belief system. You've worked hard for forty years to create your belief
       system and though I get that right now you're being as open-minded as
       you can be, for forty years you've believed that things happen out there
       and that you, passive, innocent bystander, keep getting RUN OVER-by
       cars, buses, stock-market crashes, neurotic friends, and cancer. I get that.
       Everyone in this room has lived with that same belief system. ME, IN-
       NOCENT; REALITY OUT THERE, GUILTY.
          "BUT THAT BELIEF SYSTEM DOESN'T WORK! IT'S ONE REASON
       WHY YOUR LIFE DOESN'T WORK. The reality that counts is your expe-
       rience, and you are the sole creator of your experience.'"
   "You are the sole creator of your experience." This statement is strik-
ingly similar to many of Sartre's statements about freedom and respon-
sibility. The core of est-the "it" of "getting it" -is responsibility as-
sumption. It would appear, then, that est works with some important
but obscure concepts and rephrases them into arresting language-an
accessible, Californian, "Pop" Sartre. If this ingenious application of
                                                                               257


                                                   II I FREEDOM
philosophical thought works, then professional therapists may have a
great deal to learn from est methodology.
   But does it work? Unfortunately we have no definitive answers to
that question. No controlled outcome research on est has been done;
and though est graduate testimonials are legion, they may not be relied
upon as a measure of effectiveness. A similar enthusiastic chorus of tes-
timonials has surrounded every new personal growth technology from
T-groups, encounter groups, nude encounters, and marathons, to Esa-
len body awareness, psychodrama, rolfing, TA, Gestalt, Lifespring,
Synanon. Yet the natural history of so many of these approaches
(which will most likely be the history of est as well) includes a period
of bright pulsation, then a gradual dimming, and ultimate replacement
by the next technology. Indeed, many of the participants in each of
these have had a history of prior attendance and allegiance to some
other approach. What is behind this history? Does it raise doubts about
whether the approach has a truly substantial, enduring effect?
   Follow-up studies have shown that an extremely high percentage of
est graduates rated their experiences as highly positive and construc-
tive. Yet one must be cautious in evaluating research whose design
does not include adequate controls; much empirical research suggests
that there is no outcome assessment more susceptible to error than a
simple follow-up, which is in essence a compilation of testimonials. To
examine only one aspect of research design, consider the problem of
self-selection. Who chooses to go to est? Is it possible that those who
elect to attend, to part with a large sum of money, to put up with a
grueling weekend, are going to change (or to say they change) regard-
less of the content of the program?
   The answer is, most assuredly, yes! Research on placebo reactors, on
subject expectational sets, and on the psychological attitudes of volun-
teers strongly indicates that the outcome to the individual is heavily
influenced by factors that exist before the workshop. This tendency, of
course, makes research very difficult: the common design of recruiting
volunteers for a personal growth procedure (such as an encounter
group) and contrasting their outcomes with those of a similar number
of nonvolunteer control subjects, is highly flawed. In fact, a growth
group or workshop composed of dedicated individuals who have com-
mitted themselves to the experience, who are desirous of personal
growth, and who have high expectational sets (created in part by an ef-
fective pre-group "hype"), will always be deemed successful by the
great majority of participants. To deny benefit would create significant
cognitive dissonance. The post-group "high," the glowing testimon-
258


6 I Responsibility
ials, are ubiquitous. Only a particularly inept leader could fail under
these circumstances.
   If there is no reliable outcome evidence, on what can we rely? I sug-
gest that if we examine the internal evidence available on est, we shall
discover a serious and alarming inconsistency. While avowing the goal
of responsibility assumption, est is at the same time extraordinarily heav-
ily structured. In the est weekend there are numerous, heavily enforced
ground rules: no alcohol, drugs, tranquillizers, or watches. No one is
permitted to go to the bathroom except at the four-hour bathroom
breaks. Name tags are to be worn at all times. Chairs are not to be
moved. Punctuality is stressed; latecomers are punished by not being
permitted entry or by public humiliation.'" Members are not permitted
to eat except at widely spaced meal breaks and are required to turn over
snacks hidden in their pockets.
   Many est graduates volunteer to be nonpaid assistants and, judging
from their description of their experiences, are enormously exhilarated
by the act of giving up their autonomy and basking in the powerful
rays of authority. Consider these comments made by an est volunteer, a
clinical psychologist:
        My next task was to arrange the name tags. They had to be ten in a verti-
       cal row, not touching, in perfect parallel columns. Now I was to become
       aware of est's meticulous attention to detail. The instructions for each
        chore were exact, deliberate with the precision one would expect from
       an excellent instruction manual. I was expected to carry out the task with
        the same precision.
           From name tags I went to table cloths ... Each table cloth was to be
        pinned with a square corner and should almost but not quite touch the
        floor ... I looked up to see the person supervising the assistants stand-
        ing alongside me. "It touches the floor" ...
           I redid the table cloth with full attention. My square corners were per-
        fect and the cloth hung to precisely the right length. I had completed
        the job, which in est terms meant that I had finished it with nothing left
        out of the experience.'"
   "Perfect parallel columns." "Meticulous attention to detail." "The
precision one would expect from an instruction manual." Table cloths
hung to "precisely the right length." Where amid this lust for confor-
mity and structure is one to find freedom and responsibility? I became
even more troubled when at a workshop I noted a cadre of est assis-
tants, all of whom dressed like Werner Erhard (blue blazer, white
open-collared shirt, gray slacks) and had their hair cut like Werner Er-
hard. And, like Werner Erhard, began their sentences with "and" and
spoke about est in hushed, almost religious tones. Consider other re-
                                                                               259


                                                          II I FREEDOM
ports of volunteers (which I have drawn without much selective effort
from est books endorsed by Werner Erhard and sent to me by est to in-
form me about the organization):
         A young woman who had volunteered to clean the San Francisco
      town house where Werner has his office told me that she had been in-
      structed in detail about how to do the job. "I had to clean under each ob-
      ject, such as those found on a coffee table, and then replace it precisely
      where I found it, not a half inch away."'"
         The person assigned to clean toilets at headquarters reported that
      there was one, and only one, est way to do the job. He shared that he had
      been astonished to discover how much thought and effort could go into
      cleaning toilets the est way: i.e., completely.'9
         We were instructed to smile in the role of "greeter," ... [at other
      times] we were to remain poker faced. When I remarked on this to my
      supervisor, he said, simply, "The purpose of assisting is to assist. Do
      what you're doing now. Do your humor at humor time." 5°
A practicing psychologist describes her volunteer work:
      The high point of the weekend came when the man in charge of logis-
      tics said to me, after I had mapped the shortest and most efficient route
      to the bathrooms, "Thank you, Adelaide. You've done an excellent job in
      writing these instructions." Wow! I was high for hours."'
   Doing things the "right" way. Cleaning toilets the est way. Replac-
ing coffee table objects precisely-not a half-inch away. Doing humor
at "humor time." "High for hours" after being complimented for map-
ping the most efficient route to the bathroom. These words reflect an
obvious satisfaction in the losing of one's freedom, in the joy of surren-
dering autonomy and donning the blinders of a beast of burden.
   Many est graduate statements reflect not a sense of personal power
but a giving up oneself to a higher being. Judgment and decision mak-
ing are ceded; nothing is more important than being smiled on by a di-
vine providence. An est volunteer states ingeniously:
      Werner can become very loud when a job isn't completed. I quake, but I
      know he loves me. Does that sound really crazy? That's the way it is and
      so you go about your job the way Werner wants the job done. 52
Erhard becomes a figure larger than life, his blemishes are "touched
up," his shortcomings turned into virtues, his talents turned into su-
perhuman qualities. A clinical psychologist gives her impressions of
her first exposure to Werner Erhard:
260


 6 I Responsibility
          At that time, I had not yet met Werner. A friend had told me that "he
       makes you feel as though you are the whole world, as though nothing
       else exists." The lights dimmed promptly at 8:00 and Werner emerged
       ... looking much younger than his forty years, his skin and eyes in-
       credibly clear, dressed in an impeccably tailored beige jacket, open-
       necked white shirt and dark slacks. The audience rose and applauded.
       Werner had come to be with them.••
          The audience had settled in and was intensely focused on this mag-
       netic and attractive (but not quite handsome) man with the body of a
       tennis player and the eyes of a prophet. ••
   "Incredibly clear eyes." "The eyes of a prophet." "Werner had come
to be with them!" It was such pronouncements-pronouncements that
signal the end of personal judgment and freedom- that prompted an-
other est graduate, also a clinical psychologist, to write: "The more I
envision the goose-stepping corps at the center of the est organization,
the more virtue I see in anarchy." 55 Thus the major critique that may be
levied against est is-not that it is simplistic (there may be virtue in
that), not that it is mass production (every great system of thought de-
mands a popularizer)-but that it is fundamentally inconsistent. Au-
thoritarianism will not breed personal autonomy but, on the contrary,
always stifles freedom. It is sophistry to claim, as est presumably does,
that a product of personal responsibility may emerge from a procedure
of authoritarianism. Which, after all, is the product and which the pro-
cedure? The wish to escape from freedom, as Fromm has taught us, is
rooted deep. We will go to any length to avoid responsibility and to
embrace authority even, if necessary, if it requires us to pretend to accept re-
sponsibility. Is it possible that the authoritarian procedure has become
the product? Perhaps it was from the onset-we shall never know!
      Responsibility and Psychotherapy: Research Evidence
The connection between responsibility and psychotherapy rests on two
related propositions: responsibility avoidance is not conducive to men-
tal health; and responsibility acceptance, in psychotherapy, leads to
therapeutic success. Let me examine the available research to deter-
mine what empirical evidence exists to support these propositions.
                                                                            261


                                                                    II I FREEDOM
   First, it is important to recognize that these propositions oversim-
plify the matter. Consider, for example, the nature of defense mecha-
nisms, some of which result in responsibility avoidance (such as inno-
cent victim, externalization, or losing control) and are maladaptive,
while others (such as those with considerable social reinforcement like
belief in grace or divine providence) may stand one in good stead.
Some individuals may, on the other hand, face responsibility too fully,
too openly, and without the internal resources to face the ensuing anxi-
ety. A certain amount of ego strength is necessary if one is to face one's
existential situation and the anxiety inherent therein.
IS RESPONSIBILITY AVOIDANCE BAD FOR MENTAL HEALTH?
   It is no easy matter to find evidence that responsibility avoidance is
bad for mental health, since neither "responsibility" nor "freedom"
nor "willing" has been explicitly studied by researchers. A computer-
ized search yielded no empirical studies whatsoever. The term "re-
sponsibility" is not to be found in the formal nosological categories,
nor is the concept of responsibility avoidance or acceptance to be found
in studies of psychotherapy. Consequently I approached the literature
obliquely and inquired whether there were studies that bore even a
possible relevance to responsibility. The most relevant construct, dis-
cussed in chapter 4, was locus of control.* External locus of control may
be considered as lack of responsibility acceptance. If responsibility
avoidance is "bad" for one's health, then I expected external locus of
control to be positively correlated with abnormal personal functioning.
I found research that has demonstrated that externals, when contrasted
with internals, have greater feelings of inadequacy; 56 have more mood
disturbances,S7 are more tense, anxious, hostile, and confused; 58 are
lower achievers, less politically active, and more suggestible; 59 are less
imaginative, more frustrated, and more apprehensive. 60 Schizophrenic
patients are far more likely to score in an external direction. 61 Severely
impaired psychiatric patients are more likely to be externals than are
mildly impaired patients. 62
   Depression is the disorder that has been most researched with the lo-
cus of control construct, since the clearly evident hopelessness and fa-
   • Recall that locus of control measures, at a superficial level, whether an individual ac-
cepts personal responsibility for his or her behavior and life experiences, or whether the
individual believes that what happens to him or her is unrelated to personal behavior
and is therefore beyond personal control. Individuals who accept responsibility are con-
sidered to have an "internal" locus of control, and those who reject it have an "external"
locus of control.
262


6 I Responsibility
talism of the depressed patient suggest, even to the untrained observer,
that such patients have lost the belief that they have the power to act in
their own behalf and to influence their own experiential worlds. Many
have demonstrated that depressed individuals have an external locus
of control and, as a result of the breakdown of a perceived correction
between behavior and outcome, develop a deep sense of helplessness
and hopelessness. 63
   A major theory of depression is the "learned-helplessness" model
formulated by Martin Seligman which postulates that the various com-
ponents of depression (affective, cognitive, and behavioral) are conse-
quences of one's learning early in life that outcomes (that is, rewards
and punishments) are out of one's control.64 A person who learns that
there is no causal relationship between his or her behavior and out-
come not only ceases to act in an effective manner but also begins to
evince aspects of depression. Translated into existential terms, this
model postulates simply that those who believe that they are not re-
sponsible for what happens to them in the world may pay a heavy pen-
alty. Though they avoid paying the price of existential anxiety associat-
ed with awareness of responsibility, they may, as Seligman claims,
develop a fatalism and depression.
   The learned-helplessness model of depression is rooted in the
experimental laboratory and is based on observations that experi-
mental animals exposed to unavoidable stress become less adaptive at
avoiding subsequent escapable stress. For example, dogs given inescap-
able shock were subsequently poorer at escaping from avoidable
shock than were dogs given prior escapable shock or no shock at all. 65
There have been many attempts to design comparable laboratory stud-
ies with humans. For example, subjects have been exposed to inescap-
able noise and on subsequent testing exhibit more failures to escape an
escapable noise when placed in a human analogue of an animal shuttle
box 66 or showed debilitated performance on certain problem-solving
tests. 67
   These results demonstrate, then, that if individuals are "taught" in
the laboratory that their behavior cannot extricate them from situa-
tions, then subsequent coping behavior is impaired. Furthermore, Da-
vid Klein and Martin Seligman found that depressed individuals (who
did not receive pretreatment of inescapable noise) performed in a com-
parable manner with those nondepressed subjects who did receive in-
escapable noise. 68 William Miller and Seligman found comparable find-
ings with problem-solving experiments. 69 In other experiments it has
been found that depressed subjects (unlike nondepressed subjects)
                                                                      263


                                                                  II I FREEDOM
have low expectancies for future successes on laboratory tasks, and that
these expectancies are not influenced by reinforcement.* 70
    To summarize, the locus of control, a widely used psychological in-
strument, which can be conceptually compared to responsibility accep-
 tance and avoidance, offers some evidence that responsibility avoid-
ance (external locus of control) is associated with some forms of
psychopathology, especially depression. The learned-helplessness lab-
oratory paradigm of depression offers further corroborative evidence.
    What does research tell us about the origins of the individual's pos-
 ture toward control or responsibility? There is some evidence that the
antecedents of internality and externality lie in early family environ-
ment: a consistent, warm, attentive, and responsive milieu is a precur-
 sor of the development of an internal locus of control, while an incon-
 sistent, unpredictable, and relatively uncongenial milieu (much more
 frequently found in lower socioeconomic classes) begets a sense of per-
 sonal helplessness and an external locus of control. 73 Ordinal position,
 too, makes a difference: first-borns are more likely to be internals (pos-
 sibly because they are more often placed in positions of responsibility
 for hous!.!hold affairs and for their own conduct and are often put in
charge of younger siblings as well). 74
 DOES PSYCHOTHERAPY INCREASE RESPONSIBILITY AWARENESS? IS
THAT HELPFUL?
    Several research projects have investigated the relationship between
 therapeutic outcome and shifts in the locus of control. John Gillis and
 Richard Jessor demonstrated that hospitalized patients who improved
shifted from externality to internality on locus of control. 75 P. S. Dua re-
 ported that a behavioral therapy program with a population of delin-
 quent adolescents resulted in increased internality of locus of control. 76
Stephen Nowick and Jarvis Bernes demonstrated a rise in internality
by using effectance training in a summer camp of deprived inner-city
adolescents. 77 Several studies of members of encounter experiential
groups found that the group experience shifted members toward inter-
 nality.78 Unfortunately these studies are slender contributions, not rig-
    • An interesting conceptual paradox exists between the learned-helplessness model of
depression and the cognitive model of depression described by Aaron Beck71 which pos-
its that a depressive patient is characterized by negative expectations and a powerful ten-
dency to assume personal responsibility for outcome. Thus depressed patients blame
themselves for events clearly out of their control (for example, psychotically depressed
patients may blame themselves for starting war or for a natural catastrophe). Lynn
Abramson and Harold Sackeim discuss this still unreconciled paradox in an excellent
review. 72
264


 6 I Responsibility
 orously designed, and use either no control groups at all or a "no-treat-
 ment" control which fails to control for Hawthorne effects.
 Furthermore, the results are correlational and do not tell whether a pa-
 tient improves because of a shift in locus of control, or whether a pa-
 tient shifts locus of control because of improvement.
    Another research approach has been to study the subjective reports
 of patients who have completed therapy. If patients are asked about the
 aspects of therapy which they found particularly useful, they often cite
 the discovery and assumption of personal responsibility. In a study of
 twenty successful group therapy patients my colleagues and I adminis-
 tered a sixty-item Q-sort* reflecting "mechanisms of change" in ther-
 apy.79 These sixty items were developed from twelve "curative factor"
 categories (each consisting of five items): (1) catharsis, (2) self-under-
 standing, (3) identification-that is, with other members than the
 therapist, (4) family re-enactment, (5) instillation of hope (6) universal-
 ity-that is, learning that others have similar problems, (7) group cohe-
 siveness-acceptance by others, (8) altruism-being helpful to others,
 (9) suggestions and advice, (10) interpersonal learning "input" -learn-
 ing about how others perceive one, (11) interpersonal learning "out-
 put" -improving skills in interpersonal relationships, (12) existential
 factors.
    The "existential" category consisted of these five items:
     1. Recognizing that life is at times unfair and unjust.
     2. Recognizing that ultimately there is no escape from some of life's pain
        and from death.
     3. Recognizing that no matter how close I get to other people, I must still
        face life alone.
     4. Facing the basic issues of my life and death, and thus living my life more
         honestly and being less caught up in trivialities.
     5. Learning that I must take ultimate responsibility for the way I live my
         life no matter how much guidance and support I get from others.
    The therapists in this study were not existentially oriented but in-
 stead led traditional, interactionally based groups, and the "existential
 factor" category was inserted almost as an afterthought. Hence, when
 the results were tabulated, it was with much surprise that we learned
 that many patients attributed considerable importance to these "throw-
 in" items which are not part of a traditional therapeutic program. The
   • Patients were presented with the sixty items (each on a separate card) and asked to
force-sort them into seven categories (from "most helpful" to "least helpful").
                                                                                    265


                                                         II I FREEDOM
entire category of existential factors was ranked sixth in importance of
the twelve categories (arrived at by summing and averaging the rank
order of the individual items). One item 5-"Learning that I must take ul-
timate responsibility for the way I live my life no matter how much guidance
and support I get from others" -was especially highly valued. Of the sixty
items, it was ranked fifth most important by the patients.
    D. York and C. Eisman repeated this experiment with eighteen drug
and alcohol addicts who received six months of intensive six days a
week psychotherapy (with heavy emphasis on group methods) and
fourteen parents of drug addicts, also in an intensive treatment pro-
gram. These researchers found, too, that this "responsibility" item was
often chosen (it ranked first of the sixty items in one group and second in the
other). 80
    J. Dreyer administered a "curative factor"     instrument to patients en-
tering a psychiatric hospital and again eight days later. He demonstrat-
ed that the majority of patients entering an acute psychiatric hospital
expected that the chief mode of help would be that others would give
them concrete advice or suggestions to help them deal with their major
life problems. By the eighth day of treatment the majority had altered
that belief: rather than believe that help would come from a source out-
side of themselves they now stated that they knew they must assume
greater personal responsibility. 81
    In an extensive study of the effects of women's consciousness-raising
groups, Morton Lieberman et al. reports that "interviews with group
members repeatedly revealed a thematic concern that 'I alone am re-
sponsible for my own happiness.' " 82
    Leonard Horowitz studied three videotaped interviews with forty
patients. (The first tape was before therapy, the second after eight
months of therapy, and the third after twelve months of therapy.) He
did a systematic count of the number of statements made by a patient
beginning with "I can't ..."or "I have to ... "or close synonyms there-
of ("I am not able to," "I must," "I need to," and so on), and reported a
significant decrease of such statements, less of a sense of powerlessness
and gradual assumption of personal responsibility as therapy
progressed.83
    These data all suggest that the successful psychotherapy patient be-
comes more aware of personal responsibility for life. It seems that one
of the results of effective therapy is that one not only learns about re-
 latedness and intimacy-that is, about what one can obtain from relat-
 ing to others; but also that one discovers the limits of relatedness-that
 is, what one cannot get from others, in therapy and in life as well.
266


6 I Responsibility
   Therapist Style: Research Evidence. Patients, especially those who seek
to avoid responsibility, prefer therapists who are active and directive
and who structure the therapy sessions (just as, after all, what good
guides are supposed to do). Three projects using the locus of control in-
strument provide research evidence of this preference.
   G. C. Helweg asked psychiatric patients and college students to view
films of two therapists conducting an interview-Carl Rogers, a non-
directive interviewer, and Albert Ellis, an extremely active directive in-
terviewer-and then to select the therapist each would most prefer.
The subjects who had an external locus of control (that is, avoided re-
sponsibility awareness) much preferred the active directive therapist. 84
   R. A. Jacobsen asked therapists of behavioristic and of analytic orien-
tations to construct profiles of their therapeutic approaches. She then
asked subjects to select the therapist they would prefer, and found that
individuals with an external locus of control preferred directive, be-
havioral therapists, while those with an internal locus of control pre-
ferred nondirective, analytic therapists. 85 K. G. Wilson, using similar
techniques, found that the critical variable was the therapist's position
(as perceived by the patient) toward control and participation. Inter-
nals will select therapists who they (the patients) perceive will permit
them full participation and control in the therapy process. 86
   The problem for patients with responsibility avoidance (that is, with
external locus of control) is that the choice of an active-directive thera-
pist may be self-defeating: the control requested is not the control re-
quired. The more active and forceful the therapist (even if ostensibly in the
service of helping the patient assume responsibility), the more is the patient
infantilized.
   An outcome project my colleagues and I conducted demonstrates this
point. 87 We studied eighteen encounter groups, which met for thirty
hours over a ten-week period, led by leaders from a wide variety of
ideological schools. Observers rated every aspect of a leader's behavior:
total level of activity, content of comments, the degree of executive
function (setting limits, rules, norms, goals; managing time; pacing,
stopping interceding), and the number of structured exercises (that is,
some specific task or exercise which the therapist asked the group to
perform, such as feedback exercises, hot seat, or psychodrama). All
leaders used structured exercises: some used many structured exercises
each session; some, very few. When we analyzed the relationship be-
tween leader behavior and outcome (self-esteem, coping mechanisms,
interpersonal style, peer evaluations, life values, and so forth), some in-
teresting correlations emerged:
                                                                         267


                                                             II I FREEDOM
    1. A curvilinear relationship existed between amount of executive function
       and outcome. In other words the rule of the golden mean prevailed: too
       much or too little correlated with poor outcome. Too much executive function
       resulted in a highly structured authoritarian group in which members
       failed to develop a sense of autonomy. Too little-a laissez-faire style-
       resulted in a bewildered floundering group.
    2. The more structured exercises used by the leader, the more competent did
       the members deem him to be immediately at the end of the group but the less
       successful was the outcome of his group members (measured six months
       later).
   The moral of this latter finding is obvious: if you want patients to
think you know what you're doing, be an active, vigorous, structuring
guide. However, be prepared to accept the fact that such a strategy gets
in the way of the growth of the patient and probably impedes responsi-
bility assumption.
                           Limits. of Responsibility
The concept of responsibility is crucial to psychotherapy-and it is
pragmatically true, it "works": acceptance of it enables the individual
to achieve autonomy and his or her full potential.
   But how far does this truth go? Many therapists are professional ad-
vocates of responsibility but secretly, in their own hearts and in their
own belief systems, are environmental determinists. I have for many
years treated psychotherapists, both in individual therapy and in a
therapy group for psychotherapists, and have discovered how fre-
quently psychotherapists (and I do not exclude myself) maintain a dou-
ble standard: patients constitute and are responsible for their worlds,
while therapists themselves live in a no-nonsense objective, structured
world and do their best to adjust to what "really" is.
   Both therapists and patients pay a penalty for their inconsistent be-
lief systems. The therapists advocate responsibility assumption, but
their secret doubt leaks out; they cannot convince patients of some-
thing they themselves do not believe. They are unconsciously sympa-
thetic to and, consequently, are soon ensnared by a patient's resistance.
For example, in the treatment of a divorced depressed woman who is
268


 6 I Responsibility
desperate in her search for another mate, the therapist may begin to
waver in his or her efforts to help the patient assume responsibility.
Her resistance strikes a responsive chord in the therapist, who begins
to think, "The patient seems like an engaging, attractive person, the
culture is rough for a single forty-eight-year-old woman, the singles'
scene is in many ways uninviting, there are very few attractive, single
straight men in San Francisco. Her job, which she needs for survival,
does not provide opportunities to meet other people. Perhaps she's
right: if only Mr. Right would come along, ninety percent of her prob-
lems would vaporize. This patient is a casualty of destiny." And so the
therapist enters into collusion with the patient's resistance and is soon
reduced to suggesting strategies for meeting men-singles clubs, com-
puter dating, parents without partners, and so on (as though the pa-
tient were incapable of such planning on her own).
   The real education of the therapist occurs when "Mr. Right" does
come along and somehow "happily ever after" never transpires. "Mr.
Right" is not quite smart enough, or he is too dependent or too inde-
pendent, or too poor or too rich, or too cold. Or she doesn't want to
give up her freedom, or she clasps him with such desperation that he is
frightened away, or she is so anxious that her spontaneity is stifled and
he finds her empty and uninteresting. In fact the therapist will, in
time, find that there is no end to the number of ways that an individual
who is conflicted about intimacy can manage to unhinge a
relationship.
   Obviously double standards in the therapeutic as well as in any other
relationship will not do; the therapist must examine his or her own be-
liefs about responsibility and arrive at a consistent position. The rela-
tionship between environment and personal freedom is extraordinarily
complex. Do individuals carve their own destinies, or are they, as envi-
ronmental determinists like B. F. Skinner claim, entirely determined by
environmental contingencies. ("A person does not act upon the world,
the world acts upon him.") 88
   Generally in a debate between a determinist and a libertarian (one
who believes in freedom of the will) logic and reality seem to be on the
side of the determinist; the libertarian is "softer" and appeals to un-
measurable, emotional argument. Psychotherapists are thus in a dilem-
ma. To work effectively, they must be libertarian; yet many, with ex-
tensive backgrounds in science, in either experimental or social
psychology, or in the biological or medical sciences, find themselves
wishing they could manage a leap of faith into a free choice perspec-
tive but believe secretly that the determinist argument is unassailable.
                                                                       269


                                                         II I FREEDOM
   Yet there are substantial arguments for the position of personal re-
sponsibility, some of which have the backing of empirical research and
may offer therapists a way out of this dilemma. First one must recog-
nize that an exceptionless environmental determinism is an extreme
position which no longer can claim exclusive support of "hard" em-
pirical research. Skinner contends that since we are determined by our
environment, each of us may manipulate behavior by manipulating en-
vironment; but this contention is internally inconsistent. Who is it,
after all, who is manipulating the environment? Not even the most fa-
natical determinist can contend that we are determined by our envi-
ronment to alter our environment; such a position obviously leads to
an infinite regress. If we manipulate our environment, then we are no
longer environmentally determined; on the contrary, the environment
is determined. Binswanger, in a 1936 essay commemorating Freud's
eightieth birthday, makes this point by noting that Freud's personal
stature and contributions were a marvelous example of the limitations
of his deterministic theory:
       The fact that our lives are determined by the forces of life is only one
      side of the truth; the other is that we determine these forces as our fate.
       Only the two sides together can take in the full problem of sanity and
       insanity. Those who, like Freud, have forged their fates with the ham-
       mer-the work of art he has created in the medium of language is suffi-
       cient evidence of this-can dispute this fact least of ali.B9
   In his presidential address to the American Psychological Associ-
ation in 1974, Albert Bandura referred to this viewpoint as "reciprocal
determinism" and distinguished between the potential and the actual
environments: though all individuals may have the same potential envi-
ronment, each actually regulates his or her environment. 90
       A researcher once studied schizophrenic and normal children in a set-
       ting containing an extraordinary variety of attractive devices, including
       television sets, phonographs, pinball machines, electric trains, picture
       viewers, and electric organs. To activate these playthings, children had
       simply to deposit available coins, but only when a light on the device
       was turned on; coins deposited when the light was off increased the pe-
       riod that the device would remain inoperative. Normal children rapidly
       learned how to take advantage of what the environment had to offer
       and created unusually rewarding conditions for themselves. By contrast,
       schizophrenic children, who failed to master the simple controlling
       skill, experienced the same potentially rewarding environment as a de-
       priving, unpleasant place.90
270


6 I Responsibility
Thus there is a reciprocal relationship between behavior and environ-
ment: one's behavior can influence one's environment. Bandura point-
ed out: "We are all acquainted with problem-prone individuals who,
through their obnoxious conduct, predictably breed negative social cli-
mates wherever they go. Others are equally skilled at bringing out the
best in those with whom they interact." The environment that each in-
dividual creates, in turn, influences future behavior. Environment and
behavior are interdependent; environments are not given but, like be-
havior, have causes. Bandura claimed that, "in the regress of prior
causes, for every chicken discovered by a undirectional environmental-
ist, a social learning theorist can identify a prior egg."
   A vast body of empirical research supports the position of reciprocal
determinism. This material has been ably reviewed elsewhere,91 and I
shall not cite it except to note that it is substantial and rigorous and
stems from such areas as human communicational interaction, expecta-
tional set, reciprocal relationships between personal preferences and
mass media content, cognition and perception, self-regulatory func-
tions of the self system (that is, a psychocybernetic model of self), and
biofeedback.
   Though many libertarians are pleased with the unexpected empirical
support offered by the theory of reciprocal determinism, many will say
it does not go far enough. They will argue that a fatal flaw exists in so-
cial psychological and behavioral experimental methods: the flaw is
that the dependent variable is "behavior." In discussing the relation-
ship between freedom and determinism, Bandura began with this self-
evident (from the behaviorists' standpoint) argument:
        In deciding which movie to attend from many alternatives in a large city
       there are few constraints on the individual so that personal preferences
       emerge as the predominant determinants. In contrast, if people are im-
       mersed in a deep pool of water, their behavior will be remarkably simi-
       lar however uniquely varied they might be in their cognitive and behav-
       ioral make-up. 92
The phrase that creates vast problems for the libertarian is that the be-
havior of people immersed in water will be "remarkably similar." The
issue, of course, is "behavior." How was it determined that behavior
should be the criterion by which choice or freedom is measured? If one
measures limb thrashing, bodily activity, or physiological indices, then
certainly it is true that the human's physical range or behavioral op-
tions, like that of any other creature, will be drastically curtailed. But,
even immersed to the neck, a human being has freedom: he or she
                                                                            271


                                                        II I FREEDOM
chooses how to feel about the situation, what attitudes to adopt, wheth-
er to be courageous, stoic, fatalistic, cunning, or panicked. There is no
limit to the range of psychological options available. Almost two thou-
sand years ago Epictetus said:
       I must die. I must be imprisoned. I must suffer exile. But must I die
       groaning? Must I whine as well? Can anyone hinder me from going into
       exile with a smile? The master threatens to chain me: what say you?
       Chain me? My leg you will chain-yes, but not my will-no, not even
       Zeus can conquer that. 93
   This is no minor quibble. Even though the image of a drowning
man's possessing freedom may appear ludicrous, the principle behind
the image is of great significance. One's attitude toward one's situation
is the very crux of being human, and conclusions about human nature
based solely on measurable behavior are distortions of that nature. It
cannot be denied that environment, genetics, or chance plays a role in
one's life. The limiting circumstances are obvious: Sartre speaks of a
"coefficient of adversity." 9 ' All of us face natural adversities that influ-
ence our lives. For example, contingencies may hinder any one of us
from finding a job or a mate-physical handicaps, inadequate educa-
tion, poor health, and so forth-but that does not mean that we have
no responsibility (or choice) in the situation. We are responsible still
for what we make out of our handicaps; for our attitudes toward them;
for the bitterness, anger, or depression that act synergistically with the
original "coefficient of adversity" to ensure that a handicap will defeat
the individual. Despite, for example, the high market value on physical
attractiveness, many people have a style and charm that transcend un-
attractive physical features. (It was Abraham Lincoln, I believe, who
said that after forty everyone is responsible for his face.) When all else
fails, when the coefficient of adversity is formidable, still one is re-
sponsible for the attitude one adopts toward the adversity-whether to
live a life of bitter regret or to find a way to transcend the handicap
and to fashion a meaningful life despite it.
   A patient of mine, the likelihood of whose finding a desirable mate
was severely jeopardized by a serious physical deformity, tormented
herself by "choosing" to believe that life without a love-sexual rela-
tionship with a man was without value. She closed off many options
for herself, including the deep pleasure of an intimate friendship with
another woman or a nonsexual friendship with a man. The bulk of the
therapeutic work with this patient consisted of challenging this basic
assumption-that one was either coupled or one was nothing (a view
272


6 I Responsibility
that has always had strong social reinforcement, especially for women).
Eventually she arrived at the realization that, though she bore no re-
sponsibility for her deformity, she bore complete responsibility for her
attitude toward it and for her decision to adhere to a belief system that
resulted in severe self-deprecation.
   Recognition and acceptance of the external "given" (the coefficient
of adversity) do not involve a passive stance toward one's external en-
vironment. Indeed neo-Marxists and proponents of radical psychiatry
have often levied this very charge toward the mental health move-
ment: that is, that it neglects the adverse material circumstances of the
individual, whom it urges to accept unquestioningly his or her (capital-
ist-imposed) lot in life. But a full acceptance of responsibility implies
not only that one imbues the world with significance but also that one
has the freedom and the responsibility to change one's external envi-
ronment whenever possible. The important task is to identify one's
true coefficient of adversity. The ultimate task of therapy in this regard
is to help patients reconstrue that which they cannot alter.
PHYSICAL DISEASE
   Personal responsibility extends farther than responsibility for one's
psychological state. Considerable medical evidence demonstrates that
bodily ailments are influenced by an individual's psychological state.
The field of body-mind interdependence in physical disease is so vast
that space prevents more than a quick obeisance in the proper direction
and a brief discussion of recent developments about responsibility for
one particular illness-cancer.
   Freud adumbrated the field of stress-disease linkage in 1901 in The
Psychopathology of Everyday Life, where he suggested that accidental in-
juries are not accidental but instead are a manifestation of psychic con-
flict; he described the "accident prone" individual who suffers an un-
usual amount of accidental injury. 95 Following Freud, two generations
of analysts developed the field of psychosomatic medicine in which a
number of medical illnesses (for example, arthritis, ulcers, asthma, ul-
cerative colitis) were discovered to be powerfully influenced by a pa-
tient's psychological state. Modern biofeedback technology, medita-
tion, a wide variety of autoregulatory mechanisms has heralded a surge
of renewed interest in the individual's control, and responsibility, for
aspects of bodily function that are controlled by the autonomic nervous
system (a division of the nervous system long referred to as the "invol-
untary nervous system").
   The concept of personal responsibility is now being applied in the
                                                                       273


                                                     II I FREEDOM
treatment of such illnesses as cancer-long thought to be far beyond
the purview of individual control. Cancer has always been viewed as
the prototype of externally based disease: it strikes without warning,
and the patient can do little to influence either its onset or its course.
Recently there have been highly publicized attempts to reverse this at-
titude toward cancer: patients are being urged to examine their own
roles in the disease. 0. Carl Simonton, a radiation oncologist, has spear-
headed this attempt by proposing a psychologically based therapy for
cancer. 96 His rationale is based on current disease theory which sug-
gests that the individual is constantly exposed to cancer cells, and that
one's body resists these cells unless resistance has been lowered by
some factor, thus making one susceptible to cancer. There is consider-
able evidence that stress diminishes resistance to disease by affecting
both the immunological system and the hormonal balance. If this evi-
dence is further borne out, Simonton reasons, then psychological
forces may well be marshaled to influence the course of cancer.
   Simonton's treatment method consists of daily visual meditation in
which the patient first concentrates upon a visual metaphor of how he
or she imagines the cancer to appear, and then meditates upon some vi-
sual metaphor of the body defenses defeating that cancer. For example,
one patient visualized the cancer as a mound of raw hamburger and
the body's defenses, the white blood cells, as a band of wild dogs de-
vouring the hamburger. Simonton urges patients to examine their
modes of dealing with stress. Of a patient whose disease spreads, the
first question asked is "What did you do that brought this upon
yourself?"
   To the best of my knowledge, there has been no trustworthy evi-
dence that this approach increases survival time; and one must be skep-
tical of a system that promises so much but neglects to do the relatively
simple research that would substantiate (or disprove) its claims. None-
theless, the Simonton approach teaches us something important about
the role of responsibility in the management of severe illness, because
even those patients using visual meditation who are not helped phys-
ically are often helped psychologically by assuming a more active, re-
sponsible stance toward their disease. This is of great importance, be-
cause helplessness and profound demoralization are often major
problems in the treatment of patients with cancer. Cancer, perhaps
more than any other disease, fosters a sense of helplessness-patients
feel unable to exert any personal control over their condition. Patients
with almost any other disease (such as heart disease or diabetes) have.
many ways in which they can participate in treatment: they can diet,
274


6 I Responsibility
follow medical regimens, rest, adhere to physical exercise schedules,
and so on; but patients with cancer feel they can do nothing but wait-
wait until the next cancer cell pops up somewhere in the body. This
sense of helplessness is augmented often by attitudes of doctors who
frequently do not include patients in decision making about the course
of therapy. Many doctors are reluctant to share information with pa-
tients and often bypass them and consult with the family about impor-
tant decisions that need to be made concerning future therapy.
   But if the Simonton method is indeed unsubstantiated and does not
increase survival time, then is it not based on a lie and destined to cave
in on itself? And what therapeutic methods are available to help those
patients who cannot accept his premise and method? I believe that the
concept of responsibility assumption offers therapeutic leverage for
any cancer patient, even those whose disease is far advanced. 97 First it
must be noted that regardless of one's physical circumstances (that is,
coefficient of adversity), one is always responsible for the attitude one
assumes toward one's burden. In my work with patients with metastat-
ic cancer (cancer that has spread to other parts of the body and is no
longer amenable to surgical or medical cure) I have been singularly im-
pressed with major differences between individuals in their attitude
toward their illness. Some individuals give in to despair and die a pre-
mature psychological death and, as some research suggests,98 a prema-
ture physical death as well. Others, as I described in chapter 5, tran-
scend their illness and use their impending death as a catalyst to
improve their quality of life. Responsibility for one's attitude does not
necessarily mean responsibility for one's feelings (although Sartre
would claim that to be the case) but for the stand that one takes toward
one's feelings. A joke told by Viktor Frankl illustrates this point.
       During World War I a Jewish army doctor was sitting in a fox hole with
       his gentile friend, an aristocratic colonel, and heavy shooting began.
       Teasingly the colonel said, "You are afraid, aren't you? That's just an-
       other proof that the Aryan race is superior to the Semitic one." "Sure I'm
       afraid," was the doctor's answer. "But who is superior? If you, my dear
       colonel, were as afraid as I am, you would have run away long ago.""
   The therapist working with the cancer patient may offer a great deal
by concentrating on the latter's hopelessness and helplessness. In our
work with cancer patients in support groups, my colleagues and I 100 de-
veloped several approaches geared to bolster a sense of power and con-
trol. For example, cancer patients often feel powerless and infantilized
in relation to their physicians. My group focused sharply upon this is-
                                                                             275


                                                     II I FREEDOM
sue and was effective in helping many patients assume responsibility
for their relationship to their doctors. After patients described their re-
lationships to their doctors, other members suggested other methods;
role playing was done in which the patients practiced new methods of
asserting themselves with physicians. Patients learned to request time
from a physician, to demand information (if they wished it) about their
illness; some learned to ask to see their medical charts or to view their
X-rays; and some, when it seemed to make sense, assumed ultimate re-
sponsibility and refused further medication.
   Many patients in the therapy group developed a sense of potency
through social action. Many spoke out for the rights of cancer patients
and campaigned for political issues affecting them (such as, for tax
credit for breast prostheses). Finally, in ways already described, the
group therapist helped patients regain a sense of potency by encourag-
ing them to assume responsibility for the course of their own group. By
increasing their awareness that they can shape the group to suit their
needs-indeed, that it is their responsibility to shape the group-the
therapist can increase each individual's assumption of responsibility in
other spheres of life.
                 Responsibility and Existential Guilt
In attempting to facilitate a patient's awareness of responsibility, the
therapist soon discovers an uninvited presence in the therapeutic are-
na. That presence is guilt, the dark shadow of responsibility, which of-
ten trespasses into the process of existential psychotherapy.
   In existentially based therapy "guilt" assumes a somewhat different
meaning from its meaning in traditional therapy, where it refers to a
feeling state related to a sense of wrongdoing-a pervasive, highly un-
comfortable state which has been described as anxiety plus a sense of
badness. (Freud comments that, subjectively, "the sense of guilt and
the sense of inferiority are difficult to distinguish.") 101 A distinction
may be made between neurotic guilt and "real" guilt or, in Buber's
terms, between "guilt" and "guilt feelings." 102
   Neurotic guilt emanates from imagined transgressions (or minor
transgressions that are responded to in a disproportionately powerful
manner) against another individual, against ancient and modern ta-
276


6 I Responsibility
boos, or against parental or social tribunals. "Real" guilt flows from an
actual transgression against another. Though the subjective dysphoric
experience is similar, the meaning and the therapeutic management of
these forms of guilt are very different: neurotic guilt must be ap-
proached through a working through of the sense of badness, the un-
conscious aggressivity, and the wish for punishment; whereas "real"
guilt must be met by actual, or symbolically appropriate, reparation.
   An existential perspective in psychotherapy adds important dimen-
sions to the concept of guilt. First, the full acceptance of responsibility
for one's actions broadens the scope of guilt by diminishing escape
hatches. No longer can the individual comfortably rely on such alibis
as: "I didn't mean it," "It was an accident," "I couldn't help it," "I fol-
lowed an irresistible impulse." Thus real guilt and its role in one's in-
terpersonal dealings frequently enters into the existential therapeutic
dialogue.
   But the existential concept of guilt adds something even more impor-
tant than the broadening of the scope of "accountability." Most simply
put: one is guilty not only through transgressions against another or
against some moral or social code, but one may be guilty of transgression
against oneself. Of all the existential philosophers Kierkegaard and then
Heidegger most fully developed this concept. It is important that Hei-
degger uses the same word (schuldig) to refer to both guilt and responsi-
bility. After discussing traditional uses of the term "guilty," he states:
"being guilty also has the signification of 'being responsible for' -that
is, being the cause, or author or even the occasion for something.'" 03
   One is thus guilty to the same extent that one is responsible for one-
self and one's world. Guilt is a fundamental part of Dasein (that is, hu-
man be-ing): "Being guilty does not first result from an indebtedness,
but on the contrary indebtedness becomes possible only on the basis of
a primordial being guilty.'' 104 Heidegger then proceeds to develop the
theme that "in the idea of 'guilty' there lies the character of the 'not.'"
Dasein is always constituting, and it "constantly lags behind its possi-
bilities.''105 Guilt is thus intimately related to possibility or potentiality. When
the "call of conscience" is heard (that is, the call that brings one back to
facing one's "authentic" mode of being), one is always "guilty" -and
guilty to the extent that one has failed to fulfill authentic possibility.
   This extraordinarily important concept has been developed more ful-
ly (and far less obscurely) by many others. Paul Tillich's contributions
are particularly relevant to psychotherapy. In The Courage to Be, he dis-
cusses man's anxiety at the idea of nonbeing and distinguishes three
sources of anxiety-three major modes by which nonbeing threatens
                                                                                 277


                                                             II I FREEDOM
being. Two of these (the threat to objective existence-death, and the
threat to spiritual existence-meaninglessness), I examine elsewhere. The
third is germane to this discussion. Nonbeing threatens being by
threatening our moral self-affirmation-and we experience guilt and
the anxiety of self-condemnation. Tillich's words are exceedingly clear:
       Man's being is not only given to him but also demanded of him. He is
       responsible for it; literally, he is required to answer, if he is asked, what
       he has made of himself. He who asks him is his judge, namely he himself.
       The situation produces the anxiety which in relative terms is the anxiety
       of guilt, in absolute terms the anxiety of self-rejection or condemnation.
       Man is asked to make of himself what he is supposed to become, to ful-
       fill his destiny. In every act of moral, self-affirmation man contributes to
       the fulfillment of his destiny, to the actualization of what he potentially
       is.'o6
   Tillich's view that man is "asked to make of himself what he is sup-
posed to become, to fulfill his destiny" derives from Kierkegaard who
described a form of despair that emerged from not being willing to be
oneself. Self-reflection (awareness of guilt) tempers the despair, where-
as not to know that one is in despair is a deeper form of despair yet. 107
The same point is made by the Hasidic rabbi, Susya, who shortly before
his death said, "When I get to heaven they will not ask me, 'Why were
you not Moses?' Instead they will ask 'Why were you not Susya? Why
did you not become what only you could become?" 108 Otto Rank was
acutely aware of these issues and wrote that when we restrict ourselves
from a too intensive or too quick living out, or living up, we feel our-
selves guilty on account of the unused life, the unlived life in us. 109
   Rollo May suggested that the concept of repression be understood
from the perspective of one's relationship to one's own potential, and
that the concept of the unconscious be enlarged to include the individ-
uai's unrealized repressed potential:
       We must ask the following questions, therefore, if we are to understand
       repression in a given person: What is this person's relation to his own poten-
       tialities? What goes on that he chooses or is forced to choose, to block off
       from his awareness something that he knows and on another level knows
       that he knows? ... The unconscious, then, is not to be thought of as a res-
       ervoir of impulses, thoughts, and wishes that are culturally unaccept-
       able. I define it rather as those potentialities for knowing and experienc-
       ing that the individual cannot or will not actualize." 0
  Elsewhere May describes guilt (that is, existential guilt) as "a positive
constructive emotion ... a perception of the difference between what a
278


6 I Responsibility
thing is and what it ought to be." 111 Therefore existential guilt (as well
as anxiety) is compatible with, even necessary for, mental health.
"When the person denies his potentialities, fails to fulfill them, his
condition is guilt." 112
   It is an ancient idea that each human being has a unique set of poten-
tials that yearn to be realized. Aristotle's "entelechy" referred to the
full realization of potentiality. The fourth cardinal sin, sloth, or accidie
has been interpreted by many thinkers as "the sin of failing to do with
one's life all that one knows one can do." 113 It is an extremely popular
concept in modern psychology and appears in the writings of almost
every modern humanistic or existential theorist or therapist... Al-
though it has been given many names (that is, "self-actualization,"
"self-realization," "self-development," "development of potential,"
"growth," "autonomy," and so on), the underlying concept is simple:
each human being has an innate set of capacities and potentials and,
furthermore, has a primordial knowledge of these potentials. One who
fails to live as fully as one can, experiences a deep, powerful feeling
which I refer to here as "existential guilt."
   Karen Horney's mature work, for example, is based solidly on the
concept that, under favorable conditions, the human being will natu-
rally develop his or her intrinsic potential just as an acorn will develop
into an oak tree. 123 Horney's major work, Neurosis and Human Growth, is
subtitled The Struggle toward Self-Realization. Psychopathology, in her
view, occurs when adverse circumstances inhibit a child from growing
toward the realization of his or her own possibilities. The child then
loses sight of its potential self and develops another self image: an
"idealized self" toward which it directs its life energies. Though Hor-
ney does not use the term "guilt," it is clear that she is well aware of
the price paid by the individual for not fulfilling his or her own desti-
ny. She speaks of the sense of alienation, of being split from what one
really is, which results in one's overriding one's genuine feelings,
wishes, and thoughts. One senses the existence of one's potential self,
however, and, at an unconscious level, continuously compares it with
one's "actual" self (that is, the self that actually lives in the world). The
discrepancy between what one is and what one could be generates a
flood of self-contempt with which the individual must cope through-
out life.
   Abraham Maslow, much influenced by Horney, was the first, I be-
   • Notably Buber,'" Murphy,"' Fromm/ 16 Buhler, 117 Allport,"' Rogers, 110 Jung, 120 Mas-
low,'" and Horney."'
                                                                                       279


                                                            II I FREEDOM
lieve, to use the term "self-actualization." He, too, believed that indi-
viduals naturally actualize themselves unless circumstances in their de-
velopment are so adverse that they must strive for safety rather than
for growth (that is, they must adopt a "deficiency motivation" rather
than a "growth motivation").
       If the essential [intrinsically given] core of the person is denied or sup-
       pressed, he gets sick, sometimes in obvious ways sometimes in subtle
       ways .... This inner core is delicate and subtle and easily overcome by
       habit and cultural pressure .... Even though denied, it persists under-
       ground, forever pressing for actualization .... Every falling away [from
       our core], every crime against our nature records itself in our uncon-
       scious and makes us despise ourselves. 124
   But how is one to find one's potential? How does one recognize it
when one meets it? How does one know when one has lost one's way?
Heidegger, Tillich, Maslow, and May would all answer in unison:
"Through Guilt! Through Anxiety! Through the call of conscience!"
There is general consensus among them that existential guilt is a posi-
tive constructive force, a guide calling oneself back to oneself. When
patients told her that they did not know what they wanted, Horney of-
ten replied simply, "Have you ever thought of asking yourself?" In the
center of one's being one knows oneself. John Stuart Mill, in describ-
ing this multiplicity of selves, spoke of a fundamental, permanent self
which he referred to as the "enduring 1." 125 No one has said it better
than Saint Augustine: "There is one within me who is more myself
than my self." 126
   A clinical vignette illustrates the role of existential guilt as a guide. A
patient consulted me because of severe depression and feelings of
worthlessness. She was fifty years old and for thirty-two years had
been married to a highly disturbed, spiteful man. On many occasions
in her life she had considered entering therapy but had decided
against it because she feared that self-examination would lead to the
breakup of her marriage and she could not bring herself to face isola-
tion, pain, disgrace, economic hardship, and acknowledgement of fail-
ure. Finally she became so incapacitated that she was forced to seek
help. However, though she appeared physically in my office, she re-
fused to commit herself to therapy, and we made little headway. There
was a dramatic turning point one day as she was speaking of aging and
her fear of death. I asked her to imagine herself close to death, to look
back over her life and to describe her feelings. Without hesitation, she
answered, "Regret." "Regret for what?" I asked. "Regret for wasting
my life, for never knowing what I could have been." "Regret" (her
280


6 I Responsibility
term for existential guilt) was the key to therapy. We used it as a con-
stant guide from that time forward. Though months of hard work lay
ahead for her, there was never a doubt about the outcome. She did ex-
amine herself (and she did break up her marriage), and she was able,
by the time therapy ended, to experience her life with a sense of possi-
bility rather than of regret.
   The relationship between guilt, self-contempt, and self-fulfillment is
clearly illustrated in the treatment of Bruce, the middle-aged patient I
discussed in chapter 5. Since adolescence Bruce had been preoccupied
by sex, and especially by breasts. He had been, throughout his life, self-
contemptuous. "Relief" was what Bruce wanted from therapy-relief
from anxiety, self-hatred, and the persistent sense of guilt that gnawed
away at his innards. It is an understatement to say that Bruce did not
experience himself as the author of his life. The concept that he had
personal responsibility for his life situation was like a foreign language
to him; he felt so driven, so perpetually panicked that, like Kafka, he
felt "fortunate to be able to sit in the corner and breathe." 127
   For many long months of therapy we examined his guilt and self-ha-
tred. Why was he guilty? What transgressions had he committed? He
confessed to banal, tired, petty crimes and obsessively paraded them
back and forth hour after therapy hour: as a child he had stolen loose
change from his father; he had padded figures on insurance claims,
cheated on his income tax, stolen his neighbor's morning newspaper,
and, above all, screwed women. We investigated each at length and
each time determined anew that the self-punishment exceeded the
crime. For example, when he discussed his promiscuity, he realized
that he had injured no one; he treated his lady friends well, used no de-
ceit and was considerate of their feelings. He worked through each of
his "offenses" on a rational level and realized that he was "innocent"
and unfairly harsh on himself. Yet the guilt and self-hatred persisted
undiminished.
   The first glimmer of responsibility awareness occurred as he was dis-
cussing his fear of assertiveness. Though his professional position
called for him to do so he could not represent his company well in pub-
lic discussions. It was especially difficult to disagree or to be publicly
critical of another; nothing terrified him more than a public debate.
"What could happen in that situation?" I asked. "What is the ultimate
calamity?" Bruce had no doubt about the answer. "Exposure." He
feared his adversary would insouciantly read aloud a list of all the
shameful sexual episodes in his life. He identified with the nightmare
of James Joyce's Leopold Bloom in Ulysses who, when placed on trial
for his secret desires, is humiliated when evidence of his many pecca-
                                                                       281


                                                        II I FREEDOM
dillos is paraded before the court. I wondered which he feared most-
exposure of past or of current sexual adventures? He answered, "The
present. I could handle the past affairs. I could say to myself, perhaps
even aloud, 'That was then, the way I used to be. Now I've changed.
I'm a different person.' "
  Gradually Bruce began to hear his own words, which were saying in
effect, "My current behavior, what I am doing right now, is the source
of my fear of assertiveness and is the source of my self-contempt and
my guilt as well." Bruce eventually realized that he was immediately and
entirely the source of his own self-hatred. If he wanted to feel better about
himself, or even to love himself, he had to stop doing things of which
he was ashamed.
   But an even greater realization was to follow. After Bruce made a
stand (which I described in chapter 5) and chose, for the first time, to
forgo a s~xual conquest, he gradually began to improve. In the follow-
ing months he underwent many changes (including the expected peri-
od of impotency), but gradually his compulsivity gave way and his
sense of choicefulness increased. As his behavior changed, his self-im-
age dramatically changed also, and he grew immensely in self-confi-
dence and self-love. Toward the end of therapy Bruce gradually discov-
ered two roots for his guilt. One stemmed from the way he had
demeaned his encounters with other beings (which I shall have more
to say about in chapter 8). The second source of guilt was the crime he
committed against himself. For much of his life, his attentions and en-
ergies had been focused, animalistically, on sex, on breasts, genitals,
copulation, seduction, and various ingenious, extravagant modifica-
tions of the sexual act. Bruce had, until his change in therapy, rarely
given his mind free rein, rarely engaged in other thoughts, rarely read
(except to impress females), rarely listened to music (except as a pre-
lude to sex), rarely truly encountered another person. Bruce, who had a
way with words, said that he had "lived like an animal constantly in
heat yanked to and fro by a tube of flesh dangling between his legs."
"Suppose," he said one day, "that we had the means to study closely
the life of an insect species. Imagine that we find that the male insects
are transfixed by two bumps on the thorax of the female and devote all
their days on earth to finding ways of touching these bumps. What
would we think? Why, what a peculiar way to spend one's life! Surely
there must be more to life than the touching of bumps. Yet I was like
that insect." Small wonder Bruce felt guilty. His guilt, as Tillich knew,
came from his life denial and restriction, from his self-immolation and
his refusal to become what he could become.
   No one has depicted existential guilt more vividly and arrestingly
282


6 I Responsibility
than has Franz Kafka. The refusal to acknowledge and to confront
one's existential guilt is a recurrent theme in Kafka's work. The Trial be-
gins, "Someone must have maligned Joseph K., for without having
done anything wrong, he was arrested one fine morning." Joseph K. is
asked to confess but declares, "I am completely guiltless." The entire
novel is a depiction of Joseph K.'s efforts to free himself from the court.
He seeks help from every conceivable source, but to no avail because
he faces no ordinary official court of law. As the reader gradually real-
izes, Joseph K. is confronted with an internal court, one residing in his
private depths. 128 Julius Heuscher calls attention to the court's physical
contamination with primitive instinctual material: for example, the
desks of the judges are littered with pornographic books; the court is
located in a grimy attic of a slum dwelling. 129
   When Joseph K. enters a cathedral, he is addressed by a priest who
attempts to help him by urging him to look within at his guilt. Joseph
K. replies that everything is a misunderstanding, and then rationalizes,
"And if it comes to that, how can any man be called guilty? We are all
simply men here, one as much as the other." The priest appeals, "But
that's how all guilty men talk" and once again counsels him to look
within rather than to attempt to dissolve his guilt in collective guilt.
When Joseph K. describes his next step ("I'm going to get more help"),
the priest becomes angry: "You cast about too much for outside help."
Finally, the priest shrieks from the pulpit: "Can't you see one pace be-
fore you?"
  Joseph K. then hopes to obtain from the priest a method to circum-
vent the court, "a mode of living completely outside the jurisdiction of
the court," by which he means a mode of living outside of the jurisdic-
tion of his own conscience. Is there a way, Joseph K. asks in effect, that
one may never have to face existential guilt? The priest replies that the
hope of escape is a "delusion" and tells him a parable "in the writings
that preface the law" which describes "that particular delusion." This
parable is the searing tale of the man and the doorkeeper. A man from
the country begs for admittance to the law. A doorkeeper in front of
one of the innumerable doors greets him and announces that he may
not be admitted at the moment. When the man attempts to peer
through the entrance, the doorkeeper warns him: "Try to get in with-
out my permission. But note that I am powerful. From hall to hall,
keepers stand at every door, one more powerful than the other and the
sight of the third man is already more than even I can stand."
   The supplicant decides that he had better wait until he gets permis-
sion to enter. He waits for days, for weeks, for years. He waits outside
that door for his entire life. He ages; his vision dims; and as he lies dy-
                                                                        283


                                                         II I FREEDOM
ing, he poses one last question to the doorkeeper, a question he had
never asked before: "Everyone strives to attain the law. How does it
come about then, that in all these years no one has come seeking admit-
tance but me?" The doorkeeper bellows in the man's ear (for his hear-
ing, too, is fading): "No one but you could gain admission through this
door, since this door was intended for you. I am now going to shut it."
  Joseph K. does not understand the parable; and, indeed, until the
very end when he dies "like a dog," he continues to search for help
from some external agency. 13°Kafka himself, as he records in his diaries
did not at first understand the significance of the parable. 131 Later, as
Buber points out/ 32 Kafka fully expressed the parable's significance in
his notebooks: "Confession of guilt, unconditional confession of guilt,
door springing open. It appears in the interior of the house of the
world whose turbid reflection lay behind walls." Kafka's man from the
country was guilty-not only guilty of living an unlived life, of wait-
ing for permission from another, of not seizing his life, of not going
through the door intended for him alone, but he was guilty, too, of not
accepting his guilt, of not using it as a guide to his interior, of not "un-
conditionally" confessing-an act that would have resulted in the door
"springing open."
  We are not told much about Joseph K.'s life anterior to the call of
guilt and therefore cannot with precision delineate the reasons for his
existential guilt. However, Heuscher, in a remarkably illuminating case
report, provides a proxy Joseph K.-a patient, Mr. T, whose offenses
against himself are readily apparent:
      Mr. T consulted me because he could no longer swallow. For weeks he
       had limited himself to frequent small sips of liquids and consequently
      had lost some forty pounds. Before he became ill, his time was spent ei-
      ther in the plant where his functions were interesting but well defined,
      or in his home where an intelligent but chronically neurotic, depressed,
      and alcoholic wife rendered impossible all social outings and all enter-
      taining. Sexual intimacies had stopped years ago, allegedly by mutual
      consent, and the activities at home were restricted to reading, television
      viewing, impersonal conversation when the wife was not intoxicated,
      and an occasional visit by a distant relative. Though well liked and an
      excellent conversationalist, he had no close friend, much as he wished
      for one, nor did he ever venture to develop some social activities in
      which his wife would not be included. Stuck in this rigid and restricted
      world, he cleverly parried any of the therapist's suggestions to the effect
      that he further this or that potential, pursue this or that option. 133
Though Mr. T's symptomatology ameliorated, two years of therapy did
nothing to alter his general life style. Mr. T, like Joseph K., did not lis-
ten to himself and, in his therapy, studiously avoided a deep examina-
284


 6 I Responsibility
tion of his life. Yet he insisted on continuing therapy, and the therapist
regarded his insistence as an indication of a dormant sense that a richer
life might be available to him.
   One day Mr. T brought in a dream, a dream that amazed him by its
extreme clarity. Though he had not read Kafka, his dream has an un-
canny resemblance to The Trial, which, like many of Kafka's works, had
its origin in a dream. It is too long to repeat here in its entirety, but it
begins:
       I was arrested by the police and taken to the police station. They would
       not tell me what I was arrested for, but muttered something about a
       "misdemeanor" and asked me to plead guilty. When I refused, they
       threatened to charge me with a felony. "Book me for anything you
       want!" I retorted, and so they did charge me with a felony. As a result of
       this I was convicted and ended up in a prison farm since this was, ac-
       cording to one of the policemen, the place for "nonviolent felonies."
       Initially I had felt panicky for being asked to plead guilty; then I felt an-
       gry and confused. I never found out what I was charged with, but the ar-
       resting officer had told me it was stupid to refuse to plead guilty, since a
       misdemeanor conviction would get me only six months, while a felony
       conviction carried at least five years. I got five to thirty years! 134
   Mr. T and Joseph K. are both summoned by existential guilt, and
both choose to avoid the summons by interpreting guilt in the tradi-
tional manner. They both proclaim their innocence. After all, neither
has committed a crime. "There must have been some mistake," they
reason, and each devotes himself to convincing the external authorities
of the miscarriage of justice. But existential guilt is not the result of
some criminal act that the individual has committed. Quite the con-
trary! Existential guilt (by any of its many names-"self-condemna-
tion," "regret," "remorse," and so forth) issues from omission. Joseph K.
and Mr. T are both guilty for what they have not done with their lives.
   The experiences of Joseph K. and Mr. T have rich implications for
the psychotherapist. "Guilt" is a dysphoric subjective state experienced
as "anxious badness." Yet there are different meanings of subjective
guilt. The therapist must help the patient distinguish between real
guilt, neurotic guilt, and existential guilt. Existential guilt is more than
a dysphoric affect state, a symptom to be worked through and eliminat-
ed; the therapist should regard it as a call from within which, if heed-
ed, can function as a guide to personal fulfillment. One who, like Jo-
seph K. or Mr. T, has existential guilt, has transgressed against one's
own destiny. The victim is one's own potential self. Redemption is
achieved by plunging oneself into the "true" vocation of the human
being, which, as Kierkegaard said, "is to will to be oneself." 135
                                                                                285


                 CHAPTER 7
                         Willing
                Responsibility, Willing, and Action
A        JAPANESE provO'b state" "To know and not to act is not to
know at all." Awareness of responsibility in itself is not synonymous
with change; it is only the first step in the process of change. That was
what I meant when, in the last chapter, I said that the patient who be-
comes aware of responsibility enters the vestibule of change. This
chapter will consider the rest of the journey-the passage from aware-
ness to action.
  In order to change, one must first assume responsibility: one must
commit oneself to some action. The word "responsibility" itself de-
notes that capability: "response" + "ability" -that is the ability to re-
spond. Change is the business of psychotherapy, and therapeutic
change must be expressed in action-not in knowing, intending, or
dreaming.
   How obvious this seems; yet the field of psychotherapy has tradi-
tionally obfuscated this self-evident fact. Early analysts were so con-
vinced that self-knowledge was tantamount to change that they tended
to see knowledge as the end point of therapy. If change did not occur,
then it was assumed that the patient had not achieved sufficient in-
sight. In a well-known 1950 article in a leading psychiatric journal, Al-
286


7 I Willing
len Wheelis thought it necessary to remind psychotherapists: "Therapy
can bring about personality change only in so far as it leads a patient to
adopt a new mode of behavior. A real change occurring in the absence
of action is a practical and theoretical impossibility." 1
   From the standpoint of psychotherapy, what is action? Is thinking
action? After all, thought can be demonstrated to consume energy.
Wheelis argued that to extend the concept of action to include thought
would rob action of its meaning. Thought, in and of itself, has no exter-
nal consequences-although it may be an indispensable overture to ac-
tion: one may, for example, plan, rehearse, or muster the resolve for ac-
tion. Action extends one beyond oneself; it involves interaction with
one's surrounding physical or interpersonal world. Action need not
entail gross, or even observable, movement. A slight gesture or glance
toward another may be action of momentous import. Action has two
sides: its obverse, the absence of action-for example, not acting in ha-
bitual fashion, not overeating, not exploiting others, not being dishon-
est-may be a major action indeed.
   The therapist must court action. He or she may pretend to pursue
other goals-insight, self-actualization, comfort-but in the final anal-
ysis, change (that is, action) is every therapist's secret quarry. The prob-
lem is that nowhere in training does the therapist learn about the me-
chanics of action: instead, the therapist is schooled in history taking,
interpretation, and relationship and takes the secular leap of faith that
pursuance of these activities will ultimately generate change.
   But what if this faith is mistaken? The therapist then becomes bewil-
dered and pushes for more insight, more self-scrutiny; analysis and
therapy stretch over three, four, and five years. Indeed, many courses
of psychoanalysis consume seven and eight years, and a second analy-
sis is so common it is no longer a mark of distinction. The therapist
loses sight of how change is to come about, but hopes merely that,
through a process of mutual fatigue-to use Wheelis's felicitous
phrase 2 -the patient's neurotic structure will crumble.
   But what if still no change occurs? The therapist loses patience and
starts to gaze directly at volition and action instead of glancing surrep-
titiously at them-as he or she has been trained to do. In Wheelis's
words:
       ... the therapist may find himself wishing that the patient were capable
       of more "push," more "determination," a greater willingness to "make
       the best of it." Often this wish eventuates in remarks to the patient:
       "People must help themselves"; "Nothing worthwhile is achieved with-
       out effort"; "You have to try." Such interventions are seldom included
                                                                           287


                                                            II I FREEDOM
       in case reports, for it is assumed that they possess neither the dignity nor
       effectiveness of interpretation. Often an analyst feels uncomfortable
       about such appeals to volition, as though he were using something he
       didn't believe in, and as though this would have been unnecessary had
       only he analyzed more skillfully.3
"You have to try." "People must help themselves!" Wheelis says that
this type of intervention is seldom included in case reports. Indeed,
they are not. They are entirely "off the record." Yet they are common-
place; every therapist thinks these thoughts and in a vast variety of
ways conveys them to the patient.
   But when therapists say sotto voce, "You have to try harder," or "One
must make an effort," to whom are they speaking? The problem that
most therapists face is that there is no psychic agency in the analytic (or be-
havioristic) model of the mind to which such an appeal can be made. Freud's
model of the mind, as I described in chapter 2, was based on Helmholt-
zian principles-that is, it was an antivitalistic, deterministic model
where the human being is activated and controlled by "chemical-phys-
ical forces reducible to the force of attraction and repulsion."• Freud
was unrelenting on this issue. "Man" Freud said, "is lived by the un-
conscious.... The deeply rooted belief in psychic freedom and choice
is quite unscientific and must give ground before the claims of a deter-
minism which governs mentallife." 5 Freud's man, as May said, is "not
driving any more but driven." 6 Behavior is a vector, a resultant of the
interplay of internal forces. But if that is true, if all a human being's
mental and physical activity is determined, if there is no driver, then
precisely who or what is it that can "try harder" or demonstrate "reso-
luteness" or "courage"?
   The therapist who adopts a "scientific" deterministic position in
clinical work soon encounters a serious problem: in a model of man
subdivided into such interrelating but conflicting fractions as ego, su-
perego, and id, where does the ultimate seat of responsibility lie? The
issue was framed clearly by my supervisor whom I quoted at the begin-
ning of Part II "The goal of psychotherapy is to bring the patient to the
point where he can make a free choice." But where is the "choosing
agency" located in a deterministic model? No wonder that in our fifty
sessions together he never elaborated further upon "the goal of
psychotherapy"!
   Freud never reconciled the contradiction between his deterministic
model and his therapeutic endeavors; and in The Ego and the Id, written
when he was sixty-seven, he noted that the therapist's task is "to give
the patient's ego freedom to choose one way or another." 7 This often-
288


7 I Willing
quoted statement is supreme proof of the unacceptability of his deter-
ministic model of man. Even though traditional analytic thought views
human behavior as completely determined, even though it splits the
human psyche into conflicting fractions (ego, superego, and id; or pre-
conscious, unconscious, and conscious), still it seems necessary to in-
dude a core that is not determined. The latter-day ego analysts who
proffer the concept of the "autonomous ego" continue to beg the ques-
tion. It is as if a freely choosing homunculus were placed within one
of the parts. But of course this makes no sense at all because, as May has
noted, "how can a part be free without the whole being free?" 8
   Some therapists have attempted to deal with this dilemma by stating
that, even though humans experience a subjective sense of freedom
and choice (and the therapist attempts to augment this state), nonethe-
less the state is an illusion-as determined as any other subjective state.
This is precisely the argument made by such rationalists as Hobbes and
Spinoza. Hobbes described man's sense of freedom as a phantasm of
consciousness. "If a wooden top, lashed by the boys ... sometimes
spinning, sometimes hitting men on the shins were sensible of its own
motion [it] would think it proceeded from its own will." 9 Similarly,
Spinoza said that a self-conscious and sentient stone that was set into
motion by some external (unknown) force "would believe itself to be
completely free and would think that it continued in motion solely be-
cause of its own wish." 10 However, psychotherapists who believe that
freedom is an illusionary subjective state paint themselves into a cor-
ner: since they state that successful psychotherapy results in the pa-
tient's feeling a greater sense of choice, they are in effect proclaiming
that the purpose of therapy is to create (or to restore) an illusion. This
view of the therapeutic process is, as May points out, entirely incom-
patible with one of psychotherapy's overarching values: the quest for
truth and self-knowledge.U
    The analytic model of the psyche omits something vital, something
that constitutes a major psychological construct and plays a central role
in every course of psychotherapy. Before I christen this construct, let
me review its characteristics and functions. It is the mental agency that
transforms awareness and knowledge into action, it is the bridge be-
tween desire and act. It is the mental state that precedes action (Aristot-
le).12 It is the mental"organ of the future"-just as memory is the men-
tal organ of the past (Arendt). 13 It is the power of spontaneously
beginning a series of successive things (Kant). 14 It is the seat of volition,
the "responsible mover" within (Farber). 16 It is the "decisive factor in
translating equilibrium into a process of change ... an act occurring
                                                                          289


                                                     II I FREEDOM
between insight and action which is experienced as effort or determi-
nation" (Wheelis). 16 It is responsibility assumption-as opposed to re-
sponsibility awareness. It is that part of the psychic structure that has
"the capacity to make and implement choices" (Arieti). 17 It is a force
composed of both power and desire, the "trigger of effort," 18 the
"mainspring of action." 19
   To this psychological construct we assign the label "will," and to its
function, "willing." Frankly, I should much prefer some happier
term-one simpler, less controversiaL one not so encrusted with two
thousand years of theological and philosophical polemic. "Will" has
the disadvantage of multiple, often conflicting definitions. For exam-
ple, Schopenhauer, in his major work The World as Will and Representa-
tion, regards will as the life force-"a nonrational force, a blind striv-
ing power whose operations are without purpose or design"; 20 whereas
Nietzsche, in the Will to Power, equates "willing" with power and com-
mand: "to will is to command; inherent in will is the commanding
thought." 21
   One of the major sources of controversy stems from the fact that will
is inextricably bound with freedom; for it makes little sense to speak of
an unfree will, unless we, like Hobbes and Spinoza, change the mean-
ing of will so that it becomes an illusionary subjective state rather than
an actual seat of volition. Throughout history free will has always man-
aged to offend the prevailing world view. Though the controversy re-
garding free will has continued without cessation, the opponents of
the concept have changed over the centuries. The Greek philosophers
had no term for "free will"; the very concept was incompatible with
the prevailing belief in eternal recurrence, with the belief that, as Aris-
totle held, "coming-into-being necessarily implies the pre-exis-
tence of something which is potentially but not actually." 22 The Stoic
fatalists, who believed that whatever is or will be "was to be," rejected
the idea of a freely willing agency in man. Christian theology could
not reconcile the belief in divine providence, in an omniscient, omnip-
otent god, with the claims of free will. Later, free will clashed with sci-
 entific positivism, with Isaac Newton's and Pierre Laplace's belief in an
explicable and predictable universe. Still later, the Hegelian idea of
history as a necessary progress of the world spirit clashed with a free-
will ideology that, by its very nature, rejects necessity and holds that
all that was or is done could, as well, not have been done. Lastly, free
will is opposed by all deterministic systems whether they be based on
 economic, behavioristic, or psychoanalytic principles.
   The term "will" presents a problem to the psychotherapist. It was
banished so long ago from the lexicon of therapy that when "will" is
290


7 I Willing
invoked now, the clinician has difficulty recogmzmg it-much as
though it were an old weathered acquaintance returning from exile.
Perhaps, too, the clinician is not certain that he or she wishes to recog-
nize it. Many years ago "will" was replaced by "motive," and therapists
have learned to explain one's actions on the basis of one's motives.
Thus, behavior such as paranoia is "explained" (that is, "caused") by
the unconscious motivation of homosexual impulses; genital exhibi-
tionism is "explained" by unconscious castration anxiety. Yet to ex-
plain behavior on the basis of motivation is to absolve one of ultimate
responsibility for one's actions. Motivation can influence but cannot
replace will; despite various motives, the individual still has the option
of behaving or not behaving in a certain fashion.
   Despite these many problems, no term other than "will" serves our
purpose. The definitions of will that I cited earlier ("trigger of effort,"
"responsible mover," "mainspring of action," "seat of volition") are
marvelously descriptive of the psychological construct appealed to by
the psychotherapist. Many have noted the rich connotations of the
word "will." 23 It conveys determination and commitment-"/ will do
it." As a verb "will" connotes volition. As an auxiliary verb it desig-
nates the future tense. A last will and testament is one's final effort to
lunge into the future. Hannah Arendt's felicitous phrase "the organ of
the future" has particularly important implications for the therapist,
because the future tense is the proper tense of psychotherapeutic
change. Memory ("the organ of the past") is concerned with objects; the
will is concerned with projects; and, as I hope to demonstrate, effective
psychotherapy must focus on patients' project relationships as well as on
their object relationships.
THE CLINICIAN AND THE WILL
   If will is the "responsible mover" (and that is, I believe, a particular-
ly useful definition of "will"), and if therapy requires movement and
change, then it follows that the therapist, regardless of his or her frame
of reference, must attempt to influence the will.
   To return for a moment to the previous chapter on responsibility-
what happens once the clinician has succeeded in helping a patient be-
come aware that each person bears primary responsibility for his or her
unhappy life predicament? The most simple therapeutic approach
available to the therapist is exhortative: "You are responsible for what
happens to you in your life. Your behavior is, as you yourself know,
doing you in. It is not in your best interests. This is not what you want
for yourself. Damn it, change!"
   The guileless expectation that an individual will change as a result of
                                                                        291


                                                        II I FREEDOM
this approach stems directly from the moral philosophical belief that if
one truly knows the good (that is, what is, in the deepest sense, in
one's best interest), one will act accordingly. ("Man, insofar as he acts
willfully, acts according to some imagined good." [Aquinas]) Occasion-
ally-very occasionally-this exhortative approach is effective. Indi-
viduals who undergo change as a result of short-term individual ther-
apy, or especially of a short-term experiential group experience (which
generally focuses on awareness of responsibility), often change as a re-
sult of this petition to conscious will.
   However, as I shall discuss, "will power" constitutes only the first
layer, and a thin layer at that, of "willing." Few changes are made as a
result of "a deliberate, slow, dead heave of the will," as William James
put it. 24 Well-entrenched psychopathology simply will not yield to ex-
hortation; more therapeutic power is needed. Some therapists may at-
tempt to increase therapeutic leverage by accenting the individual's
sole responsibility. The therapist helps the patient realize that not only
is the individual responsible for his situation but that only he is respon-
sible. The corollary of this realization is that the individual is also solely
responsible for the transmutation of his or her world. In other words,
no other can change one's world for one. One must (actively) change if
one is to change.
   This appeal to the will may generate some twitching or stirring in a
patient but generally is insufficient for sustained movement, and the
therapist then embarks on the long, hard middle work of therapy.
Though the particular tactics, strategy, formulated mechanisms, and
goals depend upon the therapist's ideological school and upon person-
al style, I submit that the therapy is effective insofar as it influences the
patient's will. The therapist may explicitly focus on interpretation and
insight, interpersonal confrontation, development of a trusting and
caring relationship, or analysis of maladaptive interpersonal behavior,
but each of these may be viewed as a will-influencing venture. (I delib-
erately use the term "influence" rather than "create" or "generate."
The therapist can neither create will nor inspirit or infuse the patient
with will; what the therapist can do is to liberate will-to remove en-
cumbrances from the bound, stifled will of the patient.)
   But still I am vague. In my clinical work I sometimes think of the
will, that responsible mover within the patient, as a turbine encased
and concealed by ponderous layers of metal. I know that the vital,
moving part is lodged deep in the innards of the machine. Puzzled, I
circle it. I try to affect it from a distance by exhortation, by poking, tap-
ping, or incantation, by performing those rites that I have been led to
292


7 I Willing
believe will influence it. These rites require much patience and much
blind faith-more, in fact, than many contemporary free-thinking
therapists are able to muster. What is required is a more expedient, ra-
tional approach to the will. In the remainder of this chapter I shall at-
tempt to dismantle the turbine and systematically to examine will in its
naked form and separate the mutative steps in psychotherapy from the
ritualistic, decorative ones.
   Because of will's long banishment from the psychological-psycho-
therapeutic literature, I shall first sketch the contours of a psychology
of will. I shall examine relevant clinical observations on will made by
three outstanding psychotherapist-theorists-Otto Rank, Leslie Farber,
and Rollo May-and then, with their insights as a guide, discuss the
clinical strategies and tactics of a will-influencing psychotherapy.
 Toward a Clinical Understanding of Will: Rank, Farber, May
OITO RANK-WILL THERAPY
   A discussion of the will in clinical work must include the contribu-
tions of Otto Rank, for it was he who introduced the concept of the will
into modern psychotherapy. Rank joined Freud in 1905 as one of his
first students and was one of his close associates until 1929 when ideo-
logical differences created an unbridgeable chasm between the two
men. A lay analyst and humanist with a deep and broad array of inter-
ests and knowledge, Rank's intellectual intensity in conjunction with
his protruding fiery eyes transfixed both students and patients. His po-
sition as editor of the leading psychoanalytic journal and as founder
and director of the powerful Viennese Psychoanalytic Institute made
him a highly influential figure in the early development of psycho-
analysis. But in the United States, destiny, abetted by wretched transla-
tions of his major works on psychotherapy which now (almost merci-
fully) are out of print, has not dealt well with Rank. Although he has
been an influential intellectual force at the Pennsylvania School of So-
cial Work, he has had-until the recent voice of Ernest Becker 25 -no
one else to speak for him. Becker considers Rank as the brooding ge-
nius waiting in the wings; and indeed, I gasped at his prescience, when
reading his works, especially his books, Will Therapy and Truth and
Reality.26
   Rank's system of behavior and therapy was built around the concept
                                                                      293


                                                          II I FREEDOM
of will and is far too rich and complex to allow, in a short space, more
than a brief summary of clinically relevant issues. His departure from
Freud resulted from his disagreement with the latter's psychic deter-
minism. Despite Freud's belief that behavior is a vector of opposing
drives and counterforces, a freely choosing homunculus has been, as I
noted earlier, smuggled into the ego. Rank chose as his starting place
that homunculus with executive function and labeled it "will." He re-
tained the concept of instinctual drives but placed them under the ju-
risdiction of the will: "I understand by will a positive, guiding organi-
zation which utilizes creatively as well as inhibits and controls the
instinctual drives. 27 Rank was concerned more with therapeutic out-
come than with the construction of a model of the mind and was con-
vinced that strict psychic determinism was incompatible with effective
psychotherapy. A therapeutic procedure dedicated to uncovering influ-
ences upon the patient (both historical and unconscious) could only,
Rank insisted, result in the patient's avoiding responsibility and becom-
ing less able to act: "It is astonishing how much the patient knows and
how relatively little is unconscious if one does not give the patient this
convenient excuse for refusing responsibility." 28 Rank suggested that
Freud's theory elevated the unconscious to a responsibility-dissolving
function, the precise function played by a deity in previous systems:
       The unconscious, just as the original meaning of the word shows, is a
       purely negative concept, which designates something momentarily not
       conscious, while Freud's theory has lifted it to the most powerful factor
       in psychic life. The basis for this, however, is not given in any psycho-
       logical experience but in a moral necessity, that is, to find an acceptable
       substitute for the concept of God, who frees the individual from
       responsibility.••
   The Development of the Will.       In the development of the individual,
the will, Rank believed, arises in relation to instinctual impulses. The
shaping of the will is influenced by the manner in which parents deal
with impulse education. At first the child's community is concerned
primarily with restricting the child's impulse life in order to make the
child fit for the community. The child responds to these parental re-
strictions with a counterforce: the anlage of the will or, as Rank put it,
"negative will." 30 Gradually the child begins to exert personal control
over his or her impulses and decides, for example, on the basis of love
for his or her parents to curb those aggressive impulses. Thus, the
will's function at first is inextricably tied up with impulse: either it
controls impulse, or it resists outside efforts to control impulse. The
294


7 I Willing
child's emotional life, too, Rank stated, develops in relation to the im-
pulses. Emotions are different from impulses: we seek to discharge im-
pulses, but we seek to prolong or dam up emotions. (Rank referred
here to pleasurable emotions but does not discuss dysphoric emotions.)
Hence "the emotional life corresponds, so to say, to an inhibited or
dammed up impulse life." 31
   Thus Rank suggested that the emotional life is a mirror image of the
impulse life, whereas the will is a separate executive entity equal in
power to the impulse system. "The will is an impulse, positively, ac-
tively placed in the service of the ego, and not a blocked impulse, as is
the emotion." 32 Later Rank referred to the will as an "ego impulse." 33
Rank was striving to wrench himself away from Freud but could not
divest himself of Freudian drive theory. By continuing to use psychic
compartmentalization, Rank created difficulties for himself: the wilL a
freely choosing agency, is described as an "ego impulse"-a term that
creates as much confusion as clarity.
   Rank viewed the parent-child relationship and, indeed, the entire as-
similative process-and, as we shall see, the therapeutic relation as
well-as a struggle of wills and urged that parents pay exquisite sensi-
tivity to this issue. Negative will should not be squelched but should
be accepted in such a way that it is transformed into positive or "cre-
ative" will.
   Rank subordinated other major issues of early life to the basic will
struggle. "The Oedipus complex has no other significance than that of
a great-if not the first-will conflict between the growing individual
and the counter-will of a thousand-year-old moral code, represented in
the parents." He continued (ironically): "The child must subject him-
self to it, not in order that he should let his father live and not marry
his mother but that he should not believe in general that he can do
what he wishes, that he should not trust himself to will." 34
   Rank described three developmental stages of the will: (1) counter
will-opposition to another's wilL (2) positive will-willing what one
must, (3) creative will-willing what one wants. The goal of child rear-
ing (and of therapy) is to transform the first two stages into creative
will. The major "error" of child rearing, Rank suggested, is the
squelching of impulse life and of early will ("counter" or "negative"
will). If parents teach the child that all free impulse expression is unde-
sirable and all counter will is bad, the child suffers two consequences:
suppression of his or her entire emotional life, and stunted, guilt-laden
will. The child then grows into an adult who suppresses his or her
emotions and regards the very act of willing as evil and forbidden.
                                                                        295


                                                      II I FREEDOM
These consequences are of the utmost importance for the therapist who
frequently sees patients who are unable to feel and unable, because of
guilt, to will.
   Rank's nosological system was based on the developmental vagaries
of the will. He described three basic character types: creative, neurotic,
and antisocial. The creative character has access to emotions and wills
what he or she wants. The neurotic character has a will ensnarled with
guilt and an inhibited emotional life. The antisocial character has a
suppressed will and is dominated by impulse.
   The Will and Psychotherapy. Rank felt that both Freud and Alfred
Adler annihilated the will. Freud interpreted the will as sublimated
sexual striving, and Adler viewed the will as a compensatory tendency
to adjust for the child's sense of smallness and inferiority. Both men
thus "explained away" the will by considering it as a derivative func-
tion. In contrast, Rank posited an "a priori will" and emphasized the
central role of will not only in child development but also in therapy
(which, he felt, was always carried out against the backdrop of the
will).
   Rank viewed therapist-patient interaction in much the same way as
he did the parent-child experience. In therapy "two wills clash, either
the one overthrows the other or both struggle with and against one an-
other for supremacy." 35 The goal of therapy should be for the neurotic
to learn to will and, above alL to learn to will without guilt. 36 Will en-
ters the therapeutic situation in the very first sessions, Rank observed.
The beginning of therapy is "therefore nothing other than the opening
of a great duel of wills, in which the first easy victory over the appar-
ently weak-willed patient is bitterly avenged many times." 37 The pa-
tient engages in a will conflict with the therapist and wishes both to re-
sist and to submit. Freud, Rank felt, made a serious error in ignoring
this will conflict: "The battle for supremacy [between analyst and pa-
tient] is so clear that only the wish not to see it can explain its neglect
by Freud." 88 Rather than strengthening wilL Rank felt that Freudian
technique undermined it in two ways: through its basic procedure and
through its management of "resistance."
   First, Rank felt that the basic procedure in psychoanalysis-a proce-
dure that requires a state of "will-lessness" by both patient and thera-
pist-acts to weaken will. "The basic analytic rule of free association
specifically states, eliminate entirely the little bit of will which your
neurotic weakness has perhaps not yet undermined and resign yourself
to the guidance of the unconscious .... " 39 (This comment is prescient of
criticisms levied at psychoanalysis decades later: for example, Sylvan
296


7 I Willing
Tomkins referred to psychoanalysis as a "systematic training in indeci-
sion,"40 and Allen Wheelis stated "knowledgeable moderns put their
back to the couch and in so doing may occasionally fail to put their
shoulders to the wheel." 41 )
   During the course of therapy the patient opposes what he perceives
to be the will of the therapist. Freud labeled this opposition "resis-
tance," considered it an obstacle, and suggested various techniques (pa-
tience, guidance, interpretation) to overcome it. To Rank, this view of
resistance was a serious error: he believed that the patient's protest was
a valid and important manifestation of counter will and, as such, must
not be eliminated but instead supported and transformed into creative
will. "The task of the therapist is to function in such a way that the will
of the patient shall not be broken but strengthened." 42 If the therapist
tries to force the patient to do what is "right," the patient will resist,
and therapy will fail. (Certainly within this statement lies the germ of
the modern-day tactic of "paradox" in psychotherapy.) Rank, therefore,
systematically reinforced all manifestations of the patient's will: if the
patient resisted or the patient suggested termination, Rank was careful
to point out that he considered these stands as progress. He stated:
''The neurotic cannot will without guilt. That situation can be changed
not by himself but only in relation to a therapist who accepts the pa-
tient's wilL who justifies it, submits to it, and makes it good." 43
   One situation where the patient's and the therapist's wills are certain
to clash is the termination of therapy. Some patients choose to termi-
nate precipitately; while others refuse to terminate and, if necessary,
cling to their symptoms to resist the therapist's efforts to bring therapy
to a conclusion. Rank felt that this clash of wills contained so much
therapeutic potential that it was unfortunate that it had to be carried
out at the end of therapy-and, indeed, often outside of therapy alto-
gether. Would it not be more sensible to transfer this will conflict to
the center of the therapeutic arena-indeed, even to the beginning of
therapy? Rank attempted to do just that by the special device of setting,
at the beginning of therapy, a precise "time limit." His "end-setting"
thus projected the final phase of therapy forward to the onset of treat-
ment.
   These therapeutic strategies pertaining to will represent only one as-
pect of Rank's therapeutic approach. Later I shall discuss his views on
"experiencing," on the importance of the present and the future tenses,
and on the nature of the therapeutic relationship.
                                                                       297


                                                         II I FREEDOM
LESLIE FARBER-TWO REALMS OF THE WILL
   In his effort to counter what he perceived in Freud and Adler as an
undermining of will and responsibility, Rank may have overstated the
role of will power and willfulness. By and large, patients do not
change in therapy as a result of an act of conscious will. In fact, what is
so often perplexing to the therapist (and maddening to the researcher)
is that change occurs at a subterranean leveL far out of the ken of either
the therapist or the patient.
   Is subterranean, "nonvolitional" change an act of will? It is precisely
this question, this connection between willful acts and unconsciously
based change, that has created so much difficulty for psychologists
who have tried to fashion a succinct, workable definition of will. Leslie
Farber's contribution to a psychology of will offers a vital corrective to
an exaggerated emphasis on conscious will. 44 Farber suggests that ef-
forts to define will have failed because there are two different realms
of will, each so distinct from the other that only the most vapid defini-
tion can straddle them.
   Farber's first realm of the will-and it is here that he makes his most
important contribution-is not experienced consciously during an act
and must be inferred after an event; this realm may be said to be uncon-
scious. Farber cites W. H. Auden:
       When I look back at the three or four choices in my life which have been
       decisive, I find that, at the time I made them, I had very little sense of
       the seriousness of what I was doing and only later did I discover what
       had seemed an unimportant brook was, in fact, a Rubicon.'5
   Thus Farber suggests that the important choices that one makes in
life (and, I am certain he would say, in therapy) are not consciously ex-
perienced as choices. In fact, only after the fact is one able to deduce
that one has actually made a choice. This realm of will may be thought
of as a subterranean life current that has direction but not discrete ob-
jects or goals. It provides propulsion to the individual but eludes im-
mediate and direct scrutiny.
   The second realm of will is the conscious component: it is experi-
enced during the event. One can describe, without much difficulty, its
presence, shape, and magnitude. This second realm of will presses
toward some specific object (unlike the first which is pure propulsion)
and is utilitarian in character: "I do this to get that." The goal of this
realm of the will is known from the beginning (for example, weight
loss, a change in interpersonal style, or graduation from college).
   These two realms of will must be approached differently in therapy.
298


7 I Willing
The second (conscious) realm of will is approached through exhorta-
tions and appeals to will power, effort, and determination. The first
realm is impervious to these enjoinders and must be approached ob-
liquely. A serious problem occurs when one applies exhortative sec-
ond-realm techniques to first-realm activities. Farber offers some
examples:
        I can will knowledge, but not wisdom; going to bed, but not sleeping;
        eating, but not hunger; meekness, but not humility; scrupulosity, but
        not virtue; self-assertion or bravado, but not courage; lust, but not love;
        commiseration, but not sympathy; congratulations, but not admiration;
        religiosity, but not faith; reading, but not understanding."
Here Farber provides an extraordinarily important insight to the thera-
pist, an insight to which I shall return many times in this chapter.
However, it is clear from some of the goings-on in the psychotherapy
field-the "can't" bells ringing and the "winning through intimida-
tion" genre of self-help books cascading off the presses-that Farber's
warning has not been heeded, and that many psychotherapists make
the mistake of trying to make the will of the second (conscious) realm
do the work of the will of the first.
ROLLO MAY-THE WISH AND THE WILL
   Rollo May's excellent book Love and Will brims with rich clinical in-
sights, among which is the incorporation of "wish" into the psycholo-
gy of the will!7 May reminds us that wish is anterior to will, that there
can be no meaningful action without a prior wish!8 Willing is not only
power and resolve but potentiality that is intimately bound up with the
future! 9 Through the will we project ourselves into the future, and the
wish is the beginning of that process. The wish is "an admission that
we want the future to be such and such; it is a capacity to reach down
deep into ourselves and preoccupy ourselves with a longing to change
the future." 50
   It is important to distinguish May's "wish" from the wish, defined
differently, that plays an important role in the analytic model of men-
tal functioning. Freud referred to wish throughout his metapsychology
as the "mental representation of a drive." "Only a wish can set the
mental apparatus into motion"; "Wish is the desire to relieve ten-
sion" -as Freud stated repeatedly. 51
   The most complete statement of this position is to be found in the of-
ten-cited chapter 7 of The Interpretation of Dreams,52 where Freud stated
clearly his view that man operates on the constancy principle: that is,
                                                                               299


                                                          II I FREEDOM
man attempts to maintain the level of cortical excitation at a constant
level. When a disequilibrium occurs (for example, when the infant ex-
periences hunger), the organism experiences a "wish" to be fed and
acts in such a way (for example, cries or signals discomfort in some
manner) to restore equilibrium. Gradually, as hunger is repetitively
followed by feeding, the infant acquires a visual representation (an im-
age or a "hallucination") of being fed. Later, under the pressure of the
reality principle, the child learns to delay gratification by evoking the
visual representation of the feeding experience. This process of wish-
ing and internal, temporary gratification of the wish, Freud argued, is
the anlage of all thinking. A wish can exist on various levels of con-
sciousness. An unconscious wish is the mental representation of an id
impulse. Conscious wishes are generally compromise formations-that
is, unconscious wishes tempered and molded by the superego and by
unconscious parts of the ego. To Freud, then, wish is an unfree force
akin to a tropism.
   Sartre criticized Freud's theory of repression on the ground that it
omitted the self. "How can there be a lie without a liar?" Sartre asked.
Or deception without a deceiver? Or denial without a denier? Freud's
concept of the wish is open to the same criticism: How can there be a
wish without a wisher?
   May emphasizes that wishes differ from needs, forces, or tropisms in
one important aspect: wishes are imbued with meaning. An individual
does not wish blindly. A man does not merely wish, for example, for
sex with a woman: he finds one woman attractive, another repugnant.
Wishing is selective and highly individualized. If a man indiscrimi-
nately desires sexual relationships with all women, then something is
seriously wrong. This state occurs either as a result of unusual environ-
mental press, as in the case of soldiers stationed for long periods in an
isolated Arctic station,53 or else as a result of psychopathology: one
gives up one's freedom and is then no longer the driver bU:t the driven.
It is precisely the state of "wishing" without a wisher that we term
"neurosis." That is what May meant when he said: "It is the symbolic
meanings that have gone awry in neurosis, and not the id impulses." 54
   Wish, which May defines as "the imaginative playing with the possi-
bility of some act or state occurring," 55 is the first step of the process of
willing. Only after wishing occurs can the individual pull the "trigger
of effort" and initiate the remainder of the act of willing, commitment
and choice, which culminates in action.
       "Wish" gives the warmth, the content, the imagination, the child's play,
       the· freshness, and the richness to "will." "Will" gives the self-direction,
       the maturity, to "wish." Without "wish," "will" loses its life-blood, its
300


7 I Willing
       viability, and tends to expire in self-contradiction. If you have only
       "will'' and no "wish," you have the dried-up, Victorian, neopuritan
       man. If you have only "wish" and no "will," you have the driven, un-
       free, infantile person who, as an adult-remaining-an-infant, may become
       the robot man. 06
                      The Will and Clinical Practice
The will is not an esoteric concept of interest only to the unusual pa-
tient and therapist, but it enters, in a number of ways, into the course
of therapy of every patient. Some patients seek therapy for problems of
disordered will. Of course, since there is no place for will in the stan-
dard nosology, the problem is not referred to by that name. Instead,
one may be considered obsessive-compulsive and forced by internal
pressures to act against one's will. Or one may be indecisive, unable to
wish, to want something for oneself, or to act. Or one may be caught in
the throes of some particularly agonizing decision. Or one may be tim-
id, shy, unassertive, or flooded with guilt when one attempts to will.
As Rank suggested, an individual may have learned early in life that
impulse expression is bad, and generalized that verdict of badness to
the entire realm of volition.
   Even if there is no apparent willing disorder in the presenting clini-
cal picture, it is inevitable that the issue of will will arise during psy-
chotherapy. Will is inherent in the very act of change. At some point
the patient must come to terms with what he or she truly wishes, must
become committed to a certain course, must take a stand, must choose,
must say yea to something and nay to something else. Will is also pre-
sent in every therapist-patient relationship. Although Rank overstated
the issue by characterizing therapy as a "duel of two wills," 57 he made a
valuable contribution by calling attention to this important aspect in
the therapeutic process. Some patients and therapists do indeed lock
horns over issues of dominance, and in these instances Rank's observa-
tions are germane. Resistance or obstinacy on the part of the patient is
not always an impediment to therapy, nor is it necessarily to be ana-
lyzed away. Instead, as Rank suggests, it is a stand that the patient is
taking; and, by accepting and reinforcing that stand, the therapist may
facilitate the patient's ability to will guiltlessly.
   One of the major obstacles to the therapist's acceptance of a theory of
will is the erroneous belief that "will" is synonymous with "will pow-
                                                                           301


                                                               II I FREEDOM
er." But, as Farber's "two realm" concept tells us, much more than con-
scious, teeth-gritting resolution is involved in willing. In fact, as I shall
discuss shortly, a full consideration of the meaning and roots of "will-
ing" leads us into the area of the deepest unconscious concerns. But
even unconscious willing does not occur without determination and
commitment. Effortless change is not possible; the patient must trans-
port himself or herself to therapy, must pay money, must bear the bur-
den of responsibility, must experience the conflict and the anxiety that
inevitably accompany the work of therapy. In short, the therapy vehi-
cle has no slick, noiseless automatic transmission; effort is required,
and will is the "trigger of effort."
   The concept of will is so broad and so unwieldy that only general-
ized, trivial comments may be made about it as an entity. To discuss
will in a clinically useful way, I must consider its component parts sep-
arately. Hannah Arendt's philosophical treatise on the will provides a
natural cleavage:
        [There are] two altogether different ways of understanding the faculty of
        the will: as a faculty of choice between objects or goals, the liberum arbi-
        trium, which acts as arbiter between given ends and deliberates freely
        about means to reach them; and, on the other hand, as our "faculty for
        beginning spontaneously a series in time (Kant) or Augustine's "initium
        ut esset homo creatus est," man's capacity for beginning because he him-
        self is a beginning. 58
These two ways of understanding will-"spontaneously beginning a
series in time," and deciding between given ends and choosing the
means to reach them-have obvious and valuable clinical referents.
One initiates through wishing and then enacts through choice.
   The clinician's goal is change (action); responsible action begins with
the wish. One can only act for oneself if one has access to one's desires.
If one lacks that access and cannot wish, one cannot project into the fu-
ture, and responsible volition dies stillborn. Once wish materializes,
the process of willing is launched and is transformed finally into ac-
tion. What shall we call this process of transformation? The process be-
tween wish and action entails commitment; it entails "putting myself
on record (to myself) to endeavor to do it." 59 The happiest term seems
to me to be "decision"-or, "choice,"* which is used by both clinicians
   •1 shall use "decision" and "choice" interchangeably. They are synonymous but each
emanates from a different tradition: "choice" is the preferred philosophical term; "deci-
sion" the preferred social-psychological one. Used interchangeably, they reflect my ef-
fort to span these disciplines in this discussion.
302


7 I Willing
and social scientists. To decide means that action will follow. If no ac-
tion occurs, then no true decision has been made. If wishing occurs
without action, then there has been no genuine willing. (If action oc-
curs without wishing, then, too, there is no "willing"; there is only im-
pulsive activity.)
   Either of these phases of willing-wishing and deciding-can break
down in a number of ways, each with a different clinical picture, each
requiring a different therapeutic approach.
                                      Wish
            "What shall I do? What shall I do?"
            "What stops you from doing what you want to do?"
            "But I don't know what I want! If I knew I wouldn't be here!"
   How often does the therapist participate in some such sequence as
this? How often do therapists work with patients who know what they
should do, ought to do, or must do but have no experience of what they
want to do. To work with individuals with a profound incapacity to
wish is a particularly frustrating experience, and few therapists have
not shared May's inclination to shout, "Don't you ever want any-
thing?"60 The wish-blocked individual has enormous social difficulties.
Others, too, wish to shout at such persons. They have no opinions, no
inclinations, no desires of their own. They become parasitic on the
wishes of others, and finally others become bored, drained, or fatigued
at having to supply wish and imagination for them.
   "Incapacity" to wish is too strong a phrase. More often the individu-
al distrusts or suppresses his or her wishes. Many people, in an effort to
appear strong, decide that it is better not to want; wanting makes one
vulnerable or leaves one exposed: "If I never wish, I"ll never be weak."
Others, demoralized, deaden themselves to internal experience: "If I
never wish, I will never again be disappointed or rejected." Others sub-
merge their wishes in the infantile hope that eternal caretakers will be
able to read their wishes for them. There is something infinitely reas-
suring about having someone else meet one's unexpressed wishes. Still
others so fear abandonment by caretakers that they repress all direct
expression of personal desire. They do not permit themselves the right
to wish, as though their wishing would irritate, threaten, or drive away
others.
                                                                          303


                                                              II I FREEDOM
THE INABILITY TO FEEL
   The inability to wish, or to experience one's wishes, has not been
widely and explicitly discussed in clinical literature; it is generally em-
bedded in a global disorder-the inability to feel. The psychotherapist
frequently encounters patients who seem unable to feel or to express
their feelings in words. They are unable to differentiate between var-
ious affects and seem to experience joy, anger, sorrow, nervousness,
and so on, all in the same manner. They cannot localize feelings within
their body and have a particularly striking lack of fantasies referable to
inner drives and affects. In 1967, Peter Sifenos suggested a term, "alex-
ithymia" (from the Greek, meaning "no words for feelings") to de-
scribe this clinical picture; and a large body of literature has since accu-
mulated about the alexithymic patient. 61 The psychosomatic patient is
particularly likely to be alexithymic, although many alexithymic indi-
viduals present with other clinical pictures.
   The expression of affect has always been considered an important
part of psychotherapy. Freud, in 1895 in Studies in Hysteria, first postu-
lated that hysteria was caused by the presence of some strong affect (re-
sulting, for example, from a traumatic incident) in the individual. 62 Un-
like most strong emotional reactions which are eliminated through
"the normal wearing away process of abreaction," this particular affect
persists and is repressed into the unconscious. Once that occurs, the
"constancy principle"* is violated: the level of intracerebral excita-
tion" is increased, and the individual, to restore equilibrium, develops
a symptom that symbolically provides an outlet for the tension. Thus,
psychiatric symptomatology is caused by "strangulated affect"; and
psychiatric treatment should consist of releasing this imprisoned affect
and, allowing it to enter consciousness and to be discharged through
catharsis.
   Though this was Freud's first formulation of the therapeutic mecha-
nism, and though he rapidly realized that catharsis per se was an insuf-
ficient means of therapy, this formulation is so beautiful in its simplic-
ity that it has persisted throughout the decades. Certainly it is the
popular view incarnated in innumerable Hollywood films. The con-
temporary view is that, though catharsis does not in and of itself pro-
duce change, it plays a necessary role in the therapeutic process. Cer-
tainly there is considerable research to support this view. For example,
   •That is, the need of the organism to maintain an optimal level of tension.
304


7 I Willing
my colleagues and I studied a series of patients who had had highly
successful psychotherapy outcomes. 63 In an effort to delineate the effec-
tive therapeutic mechanisms, we developed a list of sixty items (see
chapter 6) and asked the patients to rank them in the order of the im-
portance of each item to their personal change. Of the sixty items, the
patients selected "catharsis" items as the second and the fourth most
important mechanisms.
   Recently there has been an explosion of new therapies (for example,
Gestalt therapy, intense feeling therapy, 64 implosive therapy, 65 bioener-
getics,66 emotional flooding, 67 psychodrama, primal scream therapy, 68 )
which closely resemble one another in the importance placed on
awareness and expression of feelings. Though each of these therapies
advances its own rationale for this emphasis, they have, I believe, im-
portant views in common. They all hold that awareness and expression
of feelings is helpful to the individual in two primary ways: by facili-
tating interpersonal relationships, and by facilitating one's capacity to
wish.
FEELING AND INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS
   The role of affect expression in interpersonal relationships is self-
evident. Significant problems arise in relationships for the alexithymic
individual. Others never know how that person feels; he or she seems
unspontaneous, wooden, heavy, lifeless, and boring. The other person
feels burdened by having to generate all the affect in the relationship,
and begins to question whether he or she is really cared for by the
blocked person. The movements of the blocked individual are so delib-
erate and unspontaneous that they seem forced and ungenuine. There
is no play, no fun, only an awkward, ponderous self-consciousness.
One who does not feel is not sought out by others, but exists in a state
of loneliness, cut off not only from one's feelings but from those of
others.
FEELING AND WISHING
   One's capacity to wish is automatically facilitated if one is helped to
feel. Wishing requires feeling. If one's wishes are based on something
other than feelings-for example, on rational deliberation or moral im-
peratives-then they are no longer wishes but "shoulds" or "oughts,"
and one is blocked from communicating with one's real self.
   One patient in a therapy group found himself unable to understand
another patient who was upset because her therapist was leaving for a
month's vacation. "Why get yourself in a turmoil if there's nothing you
                                                                        305


                                                          II I FREEDOM
can do about it?" In other words, he placed feelings and wishes second-
ary to a utilitarian goal and said, in effect, "If nothing useful will come
of it, why wish and why feel?" This type of individual acts and has an
internal sense of guidance, but does not wish. His or her wishes ema-
nate from without, not from within. The exigencies of the environment
and the dictates of rationality determine his or her internal state of
wishing and feeling; to the observer, this individual may seem me-
chanical, predictable, and lifeless.
   Another individual-and this one is especially obvious in a therapy
group-tries to find out what he or she should feel and wish by at-
tempting to find out what the other wants and then appeasing that oth-
er. These individuals are nonspontaneous; their behavior is highly pre-
dictable; and, consequently, they are invariably boring to others.
   Wish is more than thought or aimless imagination. Wish contains an
affect and a component of force. If affect is blocked, one cannot experi-
ence one's wishes, and the entire process of willing is stunted. No one
has written a more arresting description of a man who could neither
act nor wish because he could not reach his feelings, than has Sartre in
The Age of Reason:
       He closed the paper and began to read the special correspondent's dis-
       patch on the front page. Fifty dead and three hundred wounded had al-
       ready been counted, but that was not the total, there were certainly
       corpses under the debris .... There were thousands of men in France
       who had not been able to read their paper that morning without feeling
       a clot of anger rise in their throat, thousands of men who had clenched
       their fists and muttered: "Swine!" Mathieu clenched his fists and mut-
       tered: "Swine!" and felt himself still more guilty. If at least he had been
       able to discover in himself a trifling emotion that was veritably if mod-
       estly alive, conscious of its limits. But no: he was empty, he was con-
       fronted by a vast anger, a desperate anger, he saw it and could almost
       have touched it. But it was inert-if it were to live and find expression
       and suffer, he must lend it his own body. It was other people's anger.
       ''Swine!" He clenched his fists, he strode along, but nothing came, the
       anger remained external to himself.... Something was on the threshold
       of existence, a timorous dawn of anger. At last! But it dwindled and col-
       lapsed, he was left in solitude, walking with the measured and decorous
       gait of a man in a funeral procession in Paris .... He wiped his forehead
       with his handkerchief and he thought: "One can't force one's deeper
       feelings." Yonder was a terrible and tragic state of affairs that ought to
       arouse one's deepest emotions .... "It's no use, the moment will not
       come .... " 69
   Feeling is prerequisite to wish but not identical with it. One can feel
without wishing and, consequently, without willing. Some of the best
306


 7 I Willing
known "wishless" figures in modern literature-for example, Meur-
sault in Albert Camus's The Stranger and Michel in Andre Gide's The
Immoralist-were keen sensualists but were isolated from their own
wishes and especially from wishes in the sphere of interpersonal rela-
tionships. Their actions were impulsively explosive and ultimately pro-
foundly destructive to others and to themselves.
AFFECT-BLOCK AND PSYCHOTHERAPY
   Psychotherapy with the affect-blocked (that is, feeling-blocked) pa-
tient is slow and grinding. Above all, the therapist must persevere.
Time after time he will have to inquire, "What do you feel?" "What do
you want?" Time after time he will need to explore the source and the
nature of the block and of the stifled feelings behind it. The blockade is
so apparent, even to the untrained eye, that it would be easy to con-
clude that if only it could be broken, if only the dam holding back the
patient's affect could be dynamited away, then health and wholeness
would come cascading through the breach. Consequently many thera-
pists in search of a breakthrough have used some of the new sophisti-
cated Gestalt, psychodrama, bioenergetic, and encounter affect-gener-
ating techniques in working with the affect-blocked patient.
   Does the breakthrough strategy work? Can the therapist blast a way
through the affect-blocked patient's perimeter of defenses and allow
the dammed-up emotion to escape? My colleagues and I attempted to
test this in a research project where we studied thirty-five patients in
the midst of long-term psychotherapy (many of whom were affect-
blocked and stuck in therapy) and attempted to determine whether, as
a result of an affect-arousing experience, the subsequent course of indi-
vidual therapy would be significantly altered. 70 We sent these patients
to one of three different groups for a weekend experience. Two of
these groups used powerful encounter and Gestalt affect-arousing tech-
niques; the third, a meditation, body-awareness group, served as an ex-
perimental control in that it provided a weekend with neither affect
arousal nor interpersonal interaction. The results indicated that,
though during the group weekend many patients had intense emotion-
al breakthroughs, these were not sustained: there were no discernible
effects on the subsequent course of individual therapy.
   Thus, while it is important to generate affect in therapy, there is no
evidence that rapid intensive affect arousal per se is therapeutic. Much
as we would like it otherwise, psychotherapy is "cyclotherapy" 71 -a
long, lumbering process in which the same issues are repeatedly
worked through in the therapy environment and are tested and retest-
                                                                      307


                                                            II I FREEDOM
ed in the patient's life environment. If affect breakthrough is not an
effective therapy model, neither is the opposite approach-the sterile,
overly intellectualized, highly rational approach to therapy. Affective
engagement-Franz Alexander termed it "the corrective emotional ex-
perience"72-is a necessary component of successful therapy. Though
many early therapists (such as Sandor Ferenczi, Otto Rank, Wilhelm
Reich, and Julius Moreno) recognized the need for affective engage-
ment and introduced techniques to make the therapeutic encounter
more real and affect-laden, Fritz Perls more than any other must be
credited with the development of an approach designed to increase the
individual's awareness of affect.
   Fritz Perls: "Lose Your Head and Come to Your Senses." Perls focused
doggedly on awareness. His therapy is an "experiential therapy rather
than a verbal or interpretative therapy," 73 and he worked only in the
present tense, because he felt that neurotics live too much in the past:
       Gestalt therapy is a "here and now" therapy in which we ask the patient
       during the session to turn all his attention to what he is doing in the
       present, during the course of the session-right here and now ... to be-
       come aware of his gestures, of his breathing, of his emotions and of his
       facial gestures as much as his pressing thoughts."'
   Perls would often begin with awareness of sensory impressions and
kinesthetic impressions. For example, if a patient complained of a
headache, Perls might ask the patient to focus on the headache until he
or she found that it was associated with contractions of facial muscles.
Perls might ask the patient then to exaggerate the contractions and at
each step to talk about what he or she was aware of. Gradually the pa-
tient would be led from kinesthetic sensation to affect. For example, a
woman patient might then describe her face: "It's as if I were screwing
up my face to cry." At this point the therapist might encourage the af-
fect by asking, "Would you like to cry?" 75
   Perls began with awareness and gradually worked toward "wish."
        I am convinced that the awareness technique alone can produce valuable
        therapeutic results. If the therapist were limited in his work only to ask-
        ing three questions, he would eventually achieve success with all but
        the most seriously disturbed of his patients. These three questions are
        "What are you doing?" "What do you feel?" "What do you want?" 76
Perls attempted to help patients feel things, to "own" these feelings,
and then to become aware of wishes and desires. For example, if a pa-
tient intellectualized or addressed repeated questions to the therapist,
308


7 I Willing
Peds might urge him or her to verbalize the statement and the wish
behind the question.
          Patient: What do you mean by support?
          Therapist: Could you turn that into a statement?
          Patient: I would like to know what you mean by support.
          Therapist: That's still a question. Could you turn it into a statement?
          Patient: I would like to tear hell out of you on this question if I had
       the opportunity.77
At this point the patient has greater access to his·affect and also access
to his wishes.
   The purpose of affect arousal is not sheer catharsis but to help pa-
tients rediscover their wishes. One major problem of Gestalt therapy is
that many therapists become so preoccupied with affect-arousing tech-
niques that they lose sight of the deeper purpose of the technique. To
some degree this is a result of therapists modeling themselves after
Peds, who was a great showman and enjoyed short, dramatic encoun-
ters with patients conducted before large audiences. But Peds, in his
reflective moments, expressed dismay at the tendency of therapists to
focus excessively on technique:
       It took us a long time to debunk the whole Freudian crap, and now we
       are entering a new and more dangerous phase. We are entering the
       phase of the turner-onners: turn on to instant cure, instant joy, instant
       sensory-awareness. We are entering the phase of the quacks and the con-
       men, who think if you get some break-through, you are cured .... I must
       say I am very concerned with what's going on right now .
          . . . A technique is a gimmick. A gimmick should be used only in the
       extreme case. We've got enough people running around collecting gim-
       micks, more gimmicks and abusing them. These techniques, these tools,
       are quite useful in some seminar on sensory awareness or joy .... But the
       sad fact is that this jazzing-up more often becomes a dangerous substi-
       tute activity, another phony therapy that prevents growth. 78
   Other Therapeutic Approaches. Peds is not the only worker who grap-
pled with the problem of affect block. Psychodrama, encounter groups,
hypnotic therapy, and bioenergetics have all developed techniques de-
signed to arouse affect and to increase the individual's awareness of
wishes. In fact, there has been such a vast proliferation of approaches
that it is no longer possible to trace their genealogy. All the techniques,
however, rest on the assumptions that at some deep level one knows
one's wishes and feelings, and that the therapist, through proper focus-
                                                                              309


                                                          II I FREEDOM
ing, can increase the patient's conscious experience of such internal
states.
   Postural, gestural, or other subtle nonverbal cues may provide im-
portant information about underlying but dissociated feelings and
wishes. Therapists must attend closely to such clues as clenched fists,
the pounding of one fist into one's palm, or the assumption of a closed
(crossed arms and legs) position. Each of these is a manifestation of an
underlying feeling or wish. (In such instances Peds attempted to facili-
tate the emergence of the repressed feeling by calling attention to the
behavior and then requesting the patient to exaggerate it-for exam-
ple, to hit the fist into the palm harder and faster.) Indeed, some pa-
tients are so affect-isolated that physical or physiological data are their
only contacts with their inner world-for example, "I must be sad if
my eyes are teary," or "I must be embarrassed if I'm blushing."
   The question, "What do you want?" often takes patients by surprise
since they rarely ask it of themselves. Erving and Miriam Pohlster pro-
vide an illustration:
        A college professor was feeling overburdened by having to cram each
       day with what seemed to be overwhelming requirements to write, read,
        teach-until his time felt like it was ready to burst at the seams. After a
       long recital of all the demands he experienced on his already overcom-
        mitted life, I asked him, "What do you want?" A pause ... and a gesture
       with his hands showing one hand fitting-but very loosely and with
       space left over-into another ... and then, "I want some slop in my life!"
       These recognitions are simple enough, but to many people they are not
        readily accessible. Until these wants can be at least recognized, though,
        focused action is unlikely. 79
   If patients are severely schizoid and deeply isolated from their wish-
es, a focused inquiry on the immediate here-and-now interaction may
be productive. For example, in a group session a deeply troubled young
man lamented, in response to my question, that he had no feelings and
wishes, and indicated that he could feel if only he knew what he should
feel. Other members pursued the issue, asking him about how he felt
about a number of topics (such as loneliness, strong tranquilizers, some
problems on the ward}, all of which left the patient feeling more con-
fused and discouraged. We finally became more helpful to him when
we focused the inquiry onto immediate process: "How do you feel
about being questioned about your feelings?" At this level he was able
to experience a number of genuine feelings and wishes. Though he
was frightened by all of the attention, he also felt pleased and grateful
and wanted the group to continue to press him. He also felt like a hog
310


7 I Willing
for talking so much and feared that others would resent his taking
away their time. Gradually, starting from this base of immediate affect,
the patient gained confidence with his ability to have feelings and to
identify them.
   Another patient had for years distrusted and devalued the impor-
tance of her feelings. She considered feelings phony and contrived be-
cause whenever she was aware of a particular feeling, she could also
generate an opposing feeling equal in magnitude. Endless hours of
therapy had been wasted in block-busting efforts to break down this
defense. Progress only occurred by helping her to identify some feel-
ing (and wish) of incontestable valence in the immediate here and
now. She was in a therapy group on a hospital ward which was ob-
served by the ward staff, and then had the opportunity to observe the
observers' open rehash of the meeting. When asked to describe her re-
action to the rehash, she said that she had been annoyed by the fact
that she was rarely discussed. When we investigated her annoyance
(since it appeared without question to be deeply felt), it turned to
pain-her hurt at being ignored-and then to fear-fear that the thera-
pist had, in his mind, filed her, as she put it, in the "C" (chronic) file.
She was then urged to express what she wished the therapist had said
or done. In this manner she was gradually led to experience such non-
phony wishes as her desire that he cradle and shelter her.
   Freud pointed out long ago that fantasies are wishes; and the investi-
gation of fantasy-either spontaneous or guided fantasy-is often a
productive technique in the uncovering and the assimilation of wishes.
For example, one patient could not decide whether to continue seeing
his girlfriend or to break off the relationship. His response to such
questions as "What do you want to do?" or "Do you care for her?" was
invariably a bewildered and frustrated "I don't know." The therapist
asked him to fantasize receiving a phone call from her in which she
suggested that they end their relationship. The patient visualized this
clearly, sighed with relief, and became aware of feeling liberated after
the phone call. From this fantasy it was only a short step to realize his
true wish about the relationship and to begin working on those factors
that inhibited the recognition and the enactment of his wish.
IMPULSIVITY
   A disorder of wishing does not necessarily lead to inhibition and pa-
ralysis. Some individuals avoid wishing by not discriminating among
wishes, but act promptly and impulsively on all wishes. One who acts
immediately on each impulse or whim avoids wishing as neatly as does
                                                                       311


                                                           II I FREEDOM
one who stifles or represses wishes. Thus, one avoids having to choose
among various wishes which, if experienced simultaneously, may be
contradictory. Peer Gynt, as Rollo May points out, is an excellent exam-
ple of a person who cannot discriminate among his wishes, attempts to
fulfill all of them, and in so doing loses his true self-the self that
wants one thing more deeply than another thing. 80 A wish always in-
volves direction and time. To wish is to lunge into the future, and the
indivudal must consider the future implications and the consequences
of acting upon a wish. Nowhere is this necessity more evident than in
the wish involving another person. Impulsive Peer Gyntish enactment
of all interpersonal wishes results in violation or rape of the other rath-
er than a true encounter. What is required is internal discrimination
among wishes and assigning priorities to each. If two wishes are mutu-
ally exclusive, then one must be relinquished. If, for example, a mean-
ingful, loving relationship is a wish, then a host of conflicting inter-
personal wishes-such as conquest, power, seduction, or subjugation-
must be denied. If a writer's primary wish is to communicate, he must
relinquish other, interfering wishes (such as the wish to appear clever).
Impulsive and indiscriminate enactment of all wishes is a symptom of
disordered will: it suggests an inability or a reluctance to project one-
self into the future.
   Another way to describe the basic disorder of wishing which under-
lies behavioral impulsivity is to consider two forms of ambivalence: se-
quential and simultaneous ambivalence. 81 In "sequential ambivalence"
the individual experiences first one and then the other wish. When
one is dominant, it is acted upon, and the individual does not have full
access to the other. In "simultaneous ambivalence" one is confronted
by both wishes fully and directly. James Bugental describes a patient
who was tossed about in an agonized state of sequential ambivalence:
       At 42 Mabel had been married for 17 years to a man whom she loved
       deeply and with whom she had much that was meaningful and satisfy-
       ing. Then, through a series of circumstances not important here, she
       found herself also very much in love with another man, a widower, and
       he returned her feeling. She had not lost her love for her husband, Greg,
       nor did she want only a simple "fling" with the other man, Hal.
          Thus, Mabel, when she was at home with Greg would be very aware
       of how rich her life was with him and would wonder that she could be
       tempted to overturn it with all the pain, guilt, and disruption of her own
       and his futures that would be involved. Then when she was with Hal or
       perhaps just away from Greg, she would be swept by anguish as she
       knew how vital was her feeling for Hal and her yearning for the differ-
       ent life she would have were she to go to him. 82
312


7 I Willing
The therapist's task is to help the impulsive patient transform sequen-
tial ambivalence into simultaneous ambivalence. The experiencing of
conflicting wishes sequentially is a method of defending oneself from
anxiety. When one fully experiences conflicting wishes simultaneously,
one must face the responsibility of choosing one and relinquishing the
other. Simultaneous ambivalence results in a state of extreme discom-
fort; and, as Bugental notes, it is extremely important that the therapist
avoid diluting the pain or the autonomy of the patient. The therapist is
strongly tempted to advise, to succor, to (as Heidegger puts it) "leap in
ahead of the other"; 83 yet if one is able to confront deeply and with full
intensity all one's relevant wishes, then one will eventually fashion a
creative, innovative solution-a solution that another could not have
foreseen.
   In the preceding case Mabel used her conflict to arrive at a truly cre-
ative insight: "She realized how, all along, she had subtly used her
husband to define her own being and how she had come near to doing
the same thing with Hal." She began to realize her own identity as sep-
arate from either Hal or Greg. This did not mean that she would cease
to love her husband, with whom she chose to remain, but it meant lov-
ing him in a different fashion; it meant loving him, not loving herself
and him as a fused entity; it meant being able to face life alone without
a loss of selfhood and without a devastating sense of loneliness.
COMPULSIVITY
   Compulsivity, a defense against responsibility awareness, also consti-
tutes a disorder of wishing-one that appears more organized and less
capricious than impulsivity. The compulsive individual acts in accor-
dance with inner demands that are not experienced as wishes. Some-
thing "ego-alien" directs such an individual. He is propelled to act, of-
ten against his wishes, and, if he does not act, feels acutely uncom-
fortable. Though he wishes not to act in a particular way, he finds it
extraordinarily difficult not to follow the dictates of the compulsion.
Camus caught it perfectly when, through the protagonist of The Fall, he
said, "Not taking what one doesn't desire is the hardest thing in the
world." 84 The compulsive individual is generally not aware of an in-
ability to wish: he or she does not feel empty or rudderless. On the
contrary, such an individual is active, often forceful, and at all times
possessed with a sense of purpose. But there are often waves of doubt-
times when the individual realizes that though he or she has a purpose,
it is not his or her own purpose; that though he or she has desires and
                                                                       313


                                                                 II I FREEDOM
goals, they are not his or her own desires and goals. The individual is
so busy, so driven that he feels he has neither the time nor the right to
ask himself what he wishes to do. It is only when the defense cracks
(for example, the "externally imposed" goals may become irrelevant
because of some environmental alteration such as loss of job or breakup
of family, or they have been attained-money, prestige, power) that
the individual becomes aware of the suffocation of his or her real self.
                                 Decision-Choice
Once an individual fully experiences wish, he or she is faced with deci-
sion or choice. Decision is the bridge between wishing and action.* To
decide means to commit oneself to a course of action. If no action en-
sues, I believe that there has been no true decision but instead a flirting
with decision, a type of failed resolve. Samuel Beckett's Waiting for Go-
dot is a monument to aborted decision. The characters think, plan, pro-
crastinate, and resolve, but they do not decide. The play ends with this
sequence.
            Vladimir: Shall we go?
            Estragon: Let's go.
            [Stage directions:] No one moves. 85
DECISION AND THE THERAPEUTIC CONTRACT
    Therapy and a Specific Decision.         The concept of decision enters into
psychotherapy in many ways. Some patients seek therapy specifically
because they are caught in the throes of a specific decision-often one
related to relationship or career. Consequently, therapy will center
about this decision. If the therapy is brief, focused, and task-oriented,
the therapist will enable the patient to make the decision. The therapist
will consider, with the latter, the pros and cons of the decision and will
try to help the patient sort out both conscious and subconscious impli-
cations of each choice. If, on the other hand, therapy is more intensive
    • I use "action" not in an energic but in a therapeutic sense. The slightest movement
or the obliteration of some previous habitual action may constitute momentous therapeu-
tic action.
314


7 I Willing
and the goals are more extensive, the therapist uses the specific deci-
sion as a central trunk from which, as therapy proceeds, a diversity of
themes will radiate. The therapist helps the patient understand the un-
conscious meaning of the decisional anxiety, reviews other past deci-
sional crises and, though the treatment goal is not specifically to help
the patient make a particular decision, hopes nonetheless to resolve the
conflicted areas so that the patient may make that decision and related
ones in an adaptive fashion.
   Therapy and Unconscious Decision. Many therapists focus closely on
decision even if the patient does not enter therapy for some particular
crisis of decision. In an effort to augment the patient's sense of person-
al responsibility, these therapists emphasize that every act (including
personal change) is preceded by a decision. Therapists who focus on
decision in this manner often assume that decisions are involved in be-
havior not ordinarily associated with decision. Thus, the therapist fo-
cuses on the decision that the patient makes to fail, to procrastinate, to
withdraw from others, to avoid closeness, or even to be passive, de-
pressed, or anxious. Obviously these decisions were never consciously
made; the therapist assumes that, since individuals are responsible for
their behavior, each must have "chosen" to be as he or she is. What
kind of choosing is this? It is the choosing that Farber referred to as the
"first realm" of will. Few major decisions are made with a full sense of
deliberate, conscious effort. William James, who thought deeply about
how decisions are made, described five types of decision, only two of
which, the first and the second, involve "willful" effort:
    1. Reasonable decision. We consider the arguments for and against a given
       course and settle on one alternative. A rational balancing of the books;
       we make this decision with a perfect sense of being free.
    2. Willful decision. A willful and strenuous decision involving a sense of
       "inward effort." A "slow, dead heave of the will." This is a rare decision;
       the great majority of human decisions are made without effort.
    3. Drifting decision. In this type there seems to be no paramount reason for
       either course of action. Either seems good, and we grow weary or frus-
       trated at the decision. We make the decision by letting ourselves drift in
       a direction seemingly accidentally determined from without.
    4. Impulsive decision. We feel unable to decide and the determination seems
       as accidental as the third type. But it comes from within and not from
       without. We find ourselves acting automatically and often impulsively.
    5. Decision based on change of perspective. This decision often occurs suddenly
       and as a consequence of some important outer experience or inward
       change (for example, grief or fear) which results in an important change
       in perspective or a "change in heart." [Such were the decisions made by
       many of the cancer patients I described in chapter 5]. 86
                                                                               315


                                                      II I FREEDOM
   As James suggests, then, "decision" refers to a wide array of activities
that have different subjective experiences-differing degrees of effort,
rationality, consciousness, impulsivity, and sense of responsibility.
   Therapy, Decision, and Character Structure. Some therapists-for ex-
ample, those of the transactional analysis (T.A.) school-use "decision"
in an even more radically unconscious sense. They suggest that indi-
viduals make early "archaic" decisions that shape their lives in critical
ways. A typical formulation of psychopathological development by a
T.A. therapist asserts: "The individual gets an Injunction from his par-
ent, which is implanted by strokes (i.e. reinforcements), makes a Deci-
sion around that Injunction, and then develops a script to support the
Injunction.'' 87 Thus, according to Eric Berne, the individual "decides"
on a "Life script" -an unconscious blueprint for one's life course
which encompasses personality variables and repetitive interpersonal
interactions. Berne's "Life script" is not very different from Adler's
"guiding fiction" or Horney's idealized image system. Though it is
more interpersonally based, it is loosely equivalent to the Freudian
concept of character structure.
   According to the T.A. approach, the child makes a decision that de-
termines his or her character structure and is thus responsible for it.
Yet problems arise when "decision" is used only in a conscious willful
sense. The definition of "decision" offered by T.A. reflects the confu-
sion about the term: "The decision is the point in time when the
youngster, applying all the adaptive resources of his ego, modifies his
expectations and tries to align them with the realities of the home situ-
ation."88 Note that the definition begins "The decision is the point in
time ... " as though there were a specific moment of decision, as
though between the original state and the changed state there must
have been some conscious decision.
   The therapist who takes seriously the notion that the child made
some concrete momentous archaic decision, runs the danger of devel-
oping a concrete, simplistic approach to therapeutic change. Indeed,
that is precisely what has happened: T.A. texts, for example, suggest
that the therapist's task is to help the patient go back to the "original
decision," the "first act experience," 89 (not unlike the original trauma
of early Freudian theory), relive it, and make a "redecision." The prob-
lem with this formulation is that the patient may be asked to make a
current, rational decision in order to neutralize an early decision of an
entirely different type. This is what Farber warned against when he
said it is important that one not try to force the will of the second (con-
scious) realm to do the work of the will of the first (unconscious) realm.
316


7 I Willing
  What is lost in this radical view of decision making is the subtlety of
the developmental process. An individual's character structure is not
the result of a single momentous decision that can be traced and
erased, but instead is constituted by a lifetime of innumerable choices
made and alternatives relinquished. Although the child has, of course,
no awareness of adult characterological options, nonetheless the child
always has a modicum of ability to affirm or reject what is presented to
him or to her, to submit or rebel, to identify positively or, as Erik Erik-
son has taught us, to form a negative identification with certain role
models. 90 As I discussed in the last chapter, it is necessary to the treat-
ment process that the patient accept responsibility for what he or she
is-as well as for what he or she will become. Only then can the indi-
vidual experience the power (and the hope) necessary for the process
of change. But psychotherapeutic change will not consist of a single
momentous willful decision; instead, it will be a gradual process of
multiple decisions, each paving the way for the next.
WHY ARE DECISIONS DIFFICULT?
  "Shall we go? Let's go. No one moves." What happens between the
resolve and the committed decision to act? Why do so many patients
find it so extraordinarily difficult to decide? Indeed, as I think of my
current patients, almost every one is wrestling with some decision.
Some patients are concerned with a specific life decision: what to do
about an important relationship, whether to stay married or to sepa-
rate, whether to return to school, whether to attempt to have a child.
Other patients say they know what they have to do-say, stop drinking
or smoking, lose weight, try to meet people, or try to establish an inti-
mate relationship-but cannot decide-that is, commit themselves-to
do it. Still others say they know what is wrong-for example, they are
too arrogant, too workaholic, or too uncaring-but do not know how to
decide to change and, consequently, do not commit themselves to work
in therapy.
   There is something highly painful about these unmade decisions. As
I review my patients and attempt to analyze the meaning (and the
threat) that decision has for them, I am struck first of all by the diversi-
ty of response. Decisions are difficult for many reasons: some obvious,
some unconscious, and some, as we shall see, that reach down to the
deepest roots of being.
   Alternatives Exclude. The protagonist of John Gardner's novel Gren-
del made a pilgrimage to an old priest to learn about life's mysteries. The
wise man said, "The ultimate evil is that Time is perpetual perishing
and being actual involves elimination." He summed up his meditations
                                                                        317


                                                          II I FREEDOM
on life in two simple but terrible propositions, four devastating words:
"Things fade: alternatives exclude." 91 I regard that priest's message as
deeply inspired. "Things fade" is the underlying theme of the first sec-
tion of this book, and "alternatives exclude" is one of the fundamental
reasons that decisions are difficult.
   For every yes there must be a no. To decide one thing always means
to relinquish something else. As one therapist commented to an indeci-
sive patient, "Decisions are very expensive, they cost you everything
else." 92 Renunciation invariably accompanies decision. One must relin-
quish options, often options that will never come again. Decisions are
painful because they signify the limitation of possibilities; and the
more one's possibilities are limited, the closer one is brought to death.
Indeed, Heidegger defined death as "the impossibility of farther possi-
bility."93 The reality of limitation is a threat to one of our chief modes
of coping with existential anxiety: the delusion of specialness-that,
though others may be subject to limitations, one is exempt, special, and
beyond natural law.
   One may, of course, avoid awareness of renunciation by avoiding
awareness of one's decisions. Wheelis, in a metaphor where decision is
a crossroads on a journey and renunciation is the road not taken, states
the issue beautifully:
        Some persons can proceed untroubled by proceeding blindly, believing
        they have traveled the main highway and that all intersections have
        been with byways. But to proceed with awareness and imagination is to
        be affected by the memory of crossroads which one will never encounter
        again. Some persons sit at the crossroads, taking neither path because
        they cannot take both, cherishing the illusion that if they sit there long
        enough the two ways will resolve themselves into one and hence both
        be possible. A large part of maturity and courage is the ability to make
        such renunciations, and a large part of wisdom is the ability to find ways
        which will enable one to renounce as little as possible. 94
Sitting "at the crossroads, taking neither path because they cannot take
both" is a wonderfully apt image of one who is unable to relinquish
possibility. Ancient philosophical metaphors depict the same dilemma:
Aristotle's example of the hungry dog unable to choose between two
equally attractive portions of food, or the celebrated problem of Buri-
dan's ass, a poor beast starving between two equally sweet smelling
bundles of hay. 95 In each instance the creature would have died if it
had refused to relinquish options; the salvation of each lay in trusting
desire and grasping what lay within reach.
   The metaphor has clinical relevance to those patients who suffer pa-
318


7 I Willing
ralysis of willing not only because they cannot say yes but because they
cannot say no. At an unconscious level they refuse to accept the exis-
tential implications of renunciation.
   Decisions as a Boundary Experience. To be fully aware of one's existen-
tial situation means that one becomes aware of self-creation. To be
aware of the fact that one constitutes oneself, that there are no absolute
external referents, that one assigns an arbitrary meaning to the world,
means to become aware of one's fundamental groundlessness.
   Decision plunges one, if one permits it, into such awareness. Deci-
sion, especially an irreversible decision, is a boundary situation in the
same way that awareness of "my death" is a boundary situation. Both
act as a catalyst to shift one from the everyday attitude to the "ontologi-
cal" attitude-that is, to a mode of being in which one is mindful of be-
ing. Although, as we learn from Heidegger, such a catalyst and such a
shift are ultimately for the good and prerequisites for authentic exis-
tence, they also call forth anxiety. If one is not prepared, one develops
modes of repressing decision just as one represses death.
   A major decision not only exposes one to the anxiety of groundless-
ness but also threatens one's defenses against death anxiety. By facing
one with the limitation of possibilities, decision challenges one's myth
of personal specialness. And decision, insofar as it forces one to accept
personal responsibility and existential isolation, threatens one's belief
in the existence of an ultimate rescuer.
   A fundamental decision also confronts each of us with existential iso-
lation. A decision is a lonely act, and it is our own act; no one can de-
cide for us. Many people, therefore, are highly distressed by decision
and, as I shall discuss shortly, attempt to avoid it by coercing or per-
suading others to make the decision for them.
   Decision and Guilt. Some individuals find decisions difficult because
of guilt which, as Rank emphasized, is entirely capable of paralyzing
the willing process. Will is born in a caul of guilt; it arises, said Rank,
first as counter will. The child's impulses are opposed by the adult
world, and the child's will first arises to oppose that opposition. If the
child is unfortunate enough to have parents who attempt to squelch all
impulsive expression, then the child's will becomes heavily laden with
guilt and experiences all decisions as evil and forbidden. Such an indi-
vidual cannot decide because one feels one does not have the right to
decide.
   Masochistic characters who are encased in a symbiotic relationship
with a parent have particular trouble with guilt and decision. Ester
Menaker suggests that each of these patients has a parent who in effect
                                                                        319


                                                     II I FREEDOM
said, "You dare not be yourself, you have not the ability to be yourself;
you need my presence to exist." 96 During development such individ-
uals experience any free expression of choice as forbidden since it re-
presents a violation to the parental mandate. In adulthood major deci-
sions elicit dysphoria stemming both from the fear of separateness and
from the guilt at transgressing against the dominant other.
   Existential guilt goes beyond the traditional guilt whereby the indi-
vidual regrets a real or fantasized transgression against another. In
chapter 6 I defined existential guilt as arising from one's transgressions
against oneself; it emanates from regret, from an awareness of the un-
lived life, of the untapped possibilities within one. Existential guilt,
too, may be a powerful decision-blocking factor, in that a major deci-
sion to change causes the individual to reflect upon wastage, upon how
he has sacrificed so much of his one and only life. Responsibility is a
two-edged sword: if one accepts responsibility for one's life situation
and makes the decision to change, the implication is that one alone is
responsible for the past wreckage of one's life and could have changed
long ago.
   Bonnie, a forty-eight-year-old woman, whom I discussed briefly in
chapter 4, illustrates some of these issues. For many years Bonnie had
suffered from Buerger's disease, a disorder resulting in the occlusion of
small blood vessels in the extremities. There is well-established medi-
cal evidence that nicotine is extremely toxic in Buerger's disease: pa-
tients who smoke accelerate the course of the disease and generally
must face early amputation of one or more limbs. Bonnie had always
smoked and could not-would not-stop. Various hypnotic and behav-
ioral approaches had all failed, and she seemed unable-unwilling-to
make the decision to stop smoking. She felt that in many ways her life
had been ruined by her smoking habit. She had been married to a rath-
er ruthless, authoritarian man who, ten years previously, had left her
because of her poor physical health. He was an avid outdoorsman and
decided that he would be far better off with a mate with whom he
could share outdoor activities. That Bonnie had brought about her own
disability through her "filthy habit" (as he put it) and her weakness of
will sharply compounded the problem. Eventually he gave Bonnie an
ultimatum: "Choose smoking or marriage." When she continued to
smoke, he left her.
   When Bonnie and I considered the reasons that made it difficult for
her to decide to stop smoking, one of the important themes that arose
was her realization that, if she stopped smoking now, then that would
mean that she could have stopped smoking before. The implications of that
320


7 I Willing
insight were far-reaching indeed. Bonnie always considered herself as
a victim: a victim of Buerger's disease, of her habit, of a cruel, insensi-
tive husband. But if, in fact, her fate had always been under her con-
trol, then she would have to face the fact that she must bear the entire
responsibility for her disease, for the failure of her marriage, and for
the wreckage (as she put it) of her adult life. To decide to change would
entail accepting existential guilt-the guilt for the atrocity she had
committed against herself. In therapy Bonnie had to be helped to un-
derstand the implication of deciding something for herself-that is, of
not basing her decision upon the wishes of anyone else, her husband,
her parents, or her therapist. She had to accept the guilt (and the ensu-
ing depression) for having thwarted her own growth. She had to ac-
cept the crushing responsibility for her actions in the past by grasping
her responsibility for the future. The best way-perhaps the only
way-of dealing with guilt-guilt from violation either of another or
of oneself-is through atonement. One cannot will backward. One can
atone for the past only by altering the future.
METHODS OF AVOIDING DECISION: CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
   Since decisions are extraordinarily difficult and painful for many in-
dividuals, it is not unexpected that one should develop methods of de-
cision avoidance. The most obvious method of avoiding a decision is
procrastination, and every therapist sees patients who pace tormented-
ly before the door of decision. But there are many, more subtle meth-
ods of dealing with the intrinsic pain of decision -methods that permit
one to decide while concealing from oneself that one is deciding. After
all, it is the process, not the content, of decision that is painful; and if
one can decide without knowing one is doing so, then tant mieux. I an-
swered the question Why are decisions difficult? by stressing the re-
nunciation, the anxiety, and the guilt that accompany decision. To soft-
en the awareness and pain of decision, one must erect defenses against
these threats: one can avoid the sense of renunciation by distorting the
alternatives and/or can avoid existential anxiety and guilt by arranging
for someone or some thing else to make the decision.
AVOIDANCE OF RENUNCIATION
   Trading down. If decision is difficult because one must relinquish
one possibility at the same time as one chooses another, then the deci-
sion becomes happier if one arranges the situation so that one re-
nounces less. For example, my patient Alice sought therapy because
she could not decide to divorce her husband. He had made the decision
                                                                        321


                                                    II I FREEDOM
to leave her, had moved out one year ago, but occasionally returned for
sexual relations. Alice mourned him continually, and her fantasies
brimmed with visions of winning him back. She schemed to fin9 ways
to meet him, and she humiliated herself by pleading with him to give
their marriage another trial. Reason told her that the marriage never
had or never would work and that she was far better off alone. But she
continued to give him all the power in the relationship and refused to
consider that she, too, had a decision to make in the matter. Her deci-
sion, as she viewed it, consisted of a choice between a comfortable, de-
pendent relationship with her husband and a fearful isolation.
   With the help of a few supportive counseling sessions Alice finally
handled her dilemma by becoming involved with another man. By
using him as a support, she was able to let her husband go completely.
(And, in fact, soon took the ultimate step of hauling him into court for
refusing to pay child support.) Alice was able to make the decision by
stripping the deeper implications from it. She avoided the awareness of
renunciation by altering the formula of the decision: no longer did she
have to choose between a husband (who was unavailable and toward
whom she had good reason to feel much enmity) and a state of loneli-
ness; instead, she could choose between this husband and a loving boy-
friend-not a difficult decision at all.
   In one sense, the brief supportive therapy was helpfuL since it freed
Alice from the agonizing throes of indecision. On the other hand,
though, she missed an opportunity for growth, by avoiding the deeper
implications of her decision. For example, she might, had she been
willing to plunge into these implications, have dealt with the fear of
loneliness, her inability to face life in an autonomous fashion, and her
ensuing proclivity to surrender herself to a dominant male. As it
turned out, Alice learned little from the experience and, a few months
later, was in the same situation. The relationship with the boyfriend
turned sour, she could not terminate it, and she again &ought therapy
in the throes of a decisional crisis.
   Devaluation of the Unchosen Alternative. It is freedom we fear; and
common sense, clinical experience, and psychological research all indi-
cate that the sense (and the discomfort) of freedom increases when al-
ternatives in a decision are perceived to be nearly equivalent. Comfort-
able decision-making strategy demands therefore that the chosen
alternatives be regarded as attractive, and the unchosen alternative as
unattractive. One proceeds by magnifying, at an unconscious level,
slight differences between two fairly equal options so that the decision
between them is both obvious and painless. Thus, decisions may be
322


7 I Willing
made effortlessly, and the painful confrontation with freedom entirely
avoided.
   For example, a schizoid affect-stifled patient had for many years "de-
cided" not to make an effort to change. Change, for reasons not ger-
mane to this discussion, was a terrifying prospect for him, and conse-
quently he refused to commit himself to therapy and carved out a
muted, isolated life for himself. Viewed objectively, his choice lay be-
tween a pervasive intra- and interpersonal isolation and a more sponta-
neous and expressive affective life. To continue in the decision not to
change, the patient distorted the options available to him and devalued
the unchosen alternative and overvalued the chosen one. He viewed
affect suppression as "dignity" or "decorum" and spontaneity as an
"animalistic loss of control" where he would run the risk of being
overcome by rage and tears. Another patient of mine decided to stay in
a highly unsatisfying marriage because the alternative (as she distorted
and devalued it) was to join the singles horde-the "vast, pathetic army
of freaks, cast-offs, and misfits."
  Social psychological research confirms that the devaluation of the
unchosen alternative is a common psychological phenomenon. 97 After
a subject makes a decision in which the chosen alternative does not
have a clear edge over the unchosen one, he or she experiences post-
decisional regret. To the degree that the alternative is attractive, the in-
dividual has an uncomfortable "What have I done?" feeling which is in
the literature often referred to as "cognitive dissonance": that is, an in-
dividual's choice appears inconsistent-"dissonant"-with his or her
values. Cognitive dissonance theory holds that the tension of disso-
nance is highly unpleasant, and that the individual engages (though
not at a conscious level) in some activity to reduce that tension. 98 Labo-
ratory research indicates a number of ways that one uses to decrease
the pain of renunciation. A common method that has obvious clinical
relevance is information distortion: one is open to information that ei-
ther upgrades the chosen alternative or downgrades the nonchosen al-
ternative; and, conversely, one is closed to information that increases
the attractiveness of the nonchosen alternative or decreases the attrac-
tiveness of the chosen one. 99
   Delegating the Decision to Someone. Decision, as I have discussed, is
also painful because it, if deeply considered, confronts each of us not
only with freedom but with fundamental isolation-with the fact that
each of us alone is responsible for our individual situations in life. One
can have one's decision and avoid the pain of isolation if one can locate
and persuade another to make that decision for one. Erich Fromm has
                                                                        323


                                                      II I FREEDOM
repeatedly emphasized that human beings have always had a highly
ambivalent attitude toward freedom. Though they fight fiercely for
freedom, they leap at the opportunity to surrender it to a totalitarian
regime that promises to remove the burden of freedom and decision
from them. The charismatic leader-one who makes every decision
crisply and confidently-has no difficulty recruiting subjects.
   In therapy the patient strives mightily to coax or persuade the thera-
pist to make decisions for him or her; and one of the therapist's chief
tasks is to resist being manipulated into taking care of, or taking over,
the patient. To manipulate the therapist, a patient may exaggerate help-
lessness or withhold evidence of strengths from him or her. Many pa-
tients caught in a decisional crisis scan the therapist's every syllable,
gesture, or shift of posture as though each were the expression of an
oracle; they rummage about in their post-session recollections of the
therapist's words in search of clues to the latter's view of the proper de-
cision. Regardless of their level of sophistication, patients secretly
yearn for the therapist who will provide structure and guidance. The
anger and the frustration that at some level occurs in every course of
therapy stems from the patient's dawning recognition that the thera-
pist will not relieve him or her of the burden of decision.
   There are innumerable strategies by which one may find another to
make the decision for one. Two acquaintances of mine recently di-
vorced in such a manner that each believed the other had made the de-
cision. The wife did not request a divorce but did inform her husband
that she was in love with another man. The husband, predictably, auto-
matically concluded in accordance with certain standards of his that
they must divorce, and so they did. Husband and wife each avoided
decisional pain (and post-decisional regret) by concluding that the oth-
er had made the decision. The wife had only stated her affection for an-
other man and had not asked for a divorce. The husband felt that his
wife had, by her declaration, de facto made the decision.
   One may avoid a decision by procrastinating until it is made for one
by an outside agent or circumstance. Though such an individual may
not apprehend that he or she is making a decision-for example, to fail
a course-in fact, procrastination obscures the decision to fail by plac-
ing it in the hands of the instructor. Similarly, it might appear that an
employer had made a decision to discharge an employee when in fact it
was the employee who, by performing inadequately, covertly made the
decision to leave the job. Another may not be able to decide to termi-
nate a relationship and by acting cold, indifferent, or withdrawn forces
the other into making the decision.
324


7 I Willing
   In a vignette at the beginning of this section a woman expressed the
wish to catch her husband in bed with another woman and thus be
able to leave him. Obviously she wished to leave her husband but
could not transform the wish into action: the pain of decision (or the
anticipation of post-decisional regret) was too great. Therefore she
hoped that he, by breaking some definite rule of the relationship,
would make the decision for her. She was, however, by no means
limited to sheer waiting and hoping. She discovered many other ways
of hastening the decision while still concealing from herself that it was
she who was making it: for example she subtly distanced herself from
him, and withheld sex while covertly implying that he could find it
elsewhere.
   Another patient, George, presented a similar problem. He would not
take responsibility for an overt decision. He was particularly conflicted
about a relationship to a woman; he enjoyed her sexually yet disliked
her in many other ways. He refused to make a decision about the rela-
tionship-either to say no and terminate it or to say yes and commit
himself to work on it. Consequently he was forced to "find" a decision
without "making" one. Unconsciously he attempted to force her to
make the decision. He stayed out of his apartment as much as possible
so she could not phone him, or he "accidentally" neglected to clean his
car so that another woman's objects (cigarette butts, hairpins, etc.) were
clearly in evidence. If, during this time, however, anyone had suggest-
ed to him that he was deciding to end the relationship, George would
have vigorously denied it.
   His woman friend would not make the decision to end the relation-
ship; instead, she put pressure on him to move in with her. At that
point George searched for other individuals to make the decision for
him. He canvassed all his friends for advice and repeatedly attempted
to solicit his therapist's guidance in the matter. When the therapist fi-
nally succeeded in helping him sit still long enough to examine his be-
havior, George made an interesting comment: "If someone else makes
the decision, then I will not be committed to making the decision
work." [A substantial body of social psychological research indicates
that an individual who participates in a decision-that is, the demo-
cratic process-takes responsibility for making that decision work, in
contrast to the relatively apathetic or resisting posture one takes
toward the decision another has forced upon one.]
   George knew that it was in his best interests to end the relationship.
It was better for his woman friend, too, that he end it, although for a
long time he clung to the rationalization that he did not want to hurt
                                                                       325


                                                     II I FREEDOM
her-as though long, agonizing, covert rejection were painless.) Yet he
could not bring himself to make the decision, and he slowly twisted in
the wind because he could not find another to make his decision for
him.
   Many patients "act out" in therapy in order to persuade the therapist
to make their decisions for them. Another patient, Ted, who was him-
self a psychotherapist, had for months struggled with strong depen-
dency yearnings. Ted's therapist had in one session reflected on the
difficulty of being one's own father and mother. (This concept, stated
in one form or another, must emerge in every existential therapeutic
investigation of freedom.) At the next session Ted was extraordinarily
distressed and announced that during the week he had "lost control"
and became sexually involved with one of his patients, and that he
needed someone to "blow the whistle" on him. This situation seemed
powerfully designed to force the therapist to take over decisions for
Ted. After all, how could a responsible therapist sit passively and allow
a patient to injure another patient and, in the process, to ruin his own
professional career?
   The therapist, however, chose to examine all aspects of the "acting
out," and it was soon apparent that Ted was not wholly out of control
but had made several decisions that indicated he had assumed some de-
gree of responsibility. Rather than becoming involved with a psychotic
or borderline patient, he had "chosen" a mature, well-integrated pa-
tient ready to terminate after three years of therapy. Furthermore,
though he had violated the professional ethical code, he had, in fact,
stopped far short of intercourse and had immediately brought the situ-
ation up for scrutiny in his personal therapy. Ted's interests were best
served in the long run by the therapist's refusal to be manipulated into
making Ted's decision ("whistle blowing") and by the therapist's per-
sistence in demonstrating to Ted that, though it was frightening to
make his own decisions, he was entirely capable of d?ing so.
   Delegating the Decision to Some Thing. An ancient mode of decision
making was to consult fate. Whether fate's answer was to be found in
sheep entrails, tea leaves, the I Ching, meteorological changes, or any of
a vast array of portents was of no matter. What was important was that,
by transferring decision to an outside agency, the individual was
spared the existential pain inherent in decision.
   A modern version of total reliance on chance is to be found in Luke
Rhinehart's novel The Dice Man, m which the protagonist makes one
fundamental decision: to leave all other decisions up to chance-the
toss of the dice. 100 Thereafter he makes every major life decision by
326


7 I Willing
drawing up a list of options and allowing the dice to decide. True,
some decisions have to be made in respect to which options are placed
<;>n the list, but these are minor and relatively uncommitting, since each
option has so many odds against it. The dice man's rationale for his be-
havior is that many aspects of his personality are permanently
squelched by the "majority rule" of his other traits. By leaving the deci-
sion to the dice, he is permitting each part some opportunity to exist.
Although the dice man is presented as an existential hero-an individ-
ual who embraces total freedom (that is, randomness) and contingency,
he may be also viewed as the opposite-one who has surrendered free-
dom and responsibility. Indeed, whenever the dice man is called upon
to answer for some particularly outrageous act, he has one response,
"The dice told me to do it."
    "Rules" are another handy decision-making agency, and individuals
have always sought the comfort of a comprehensive set of rules to re-
lieve them from the pain of decision. The Orthodox Jews who follow
the 513 Judaic laws are spared many decisions, since so much of their
behavior is prescribed for them, ranging from the daily rituals accom-
panying each of the day's events to the proper course of action when
faced with major life crises. The rules of traditional societies often stifle
initiation and limit ambition and choice, but they do offer blessed re-
lief from such decisions as, Whom should I marry? Should I divorce?
What career shall I pursue? How shall I spend my free time? Whom
shall I befriend?-and so forth.
    Bugental, in describing the treatment of a patient, an undergraduate
dean of students, beautifully illustrates how "rules" allow one to avoid
decision:
        Dean Stoddert smiled understandingly but with a trace of sadness at the
        girl as she said, "I certainly understand now why you did as you did, but
        you see I really have no choice in the matter. If I made an exception for
        you now, then I'd have to make an exception for everyone else who had
        good reasons for breaking the rules. Pretty soon the rules would be
        meaningless, wouldn't they? So, although I really am sorry about it, the
        situation is clear, and it calls for you to be restricted to campus for the
        next month."
           The student looked appreciatively at the Dean through her tears. "It
        helps to know that you understand, but somehow it just doesn't seem
        fair under the circumstances. This will mean I'll lose my job, and I don't
        know whether Dad will be able to keep me in school or not." The Dean
        was sympathetic but made it evident that she had no choice.
           When the student was gone, Dean Stoddert sat back in her chair for a
        minute, herself swept by contradictory feelings. On the one hand, she
        felt a certain satisfaction that she had finally trained her feelings and her
                                                                                 327


                                                            II I FREEDOM
       judgment to the point where she could stand firm when the regulations
       required it. For so many years she had found herself carried away by her
      sympathies so that she almost never was able to combine understanding
       with consistent application of the rules ....
          Ruefully, Margaret Stoddert reflected that it had been a real struggle
       to be able to handle a situation as she had just handled this one. Yet, and
       here the irony came in, somehow she wasn't content. Somehow, she felt
       vaguely uneasy even as she reassured herself that she had done the job
       well. Later in the day, on the couch in my office, she found herself rumi-
       nating: "I don't know what it is that keeps bothering me about that in-
       terview, but I feel restless whenever I think about it. And I keep think-
       ing about it. It's like there's something I've overlooked, but I can't think
       what it might be ...." 101
   Margaret, as Bugental points out, had, instead of administering the
rules, become administered by the rules. She concluded that "rules
have meanings in themselves," that rules and consistency transcend
consideration of human understanding and human needs. Margaret
sensed that there was danger if choice was exercised. Her rationale of
the danger was that "if I make an exception for you now, then I'd have
to make an exception for everyone else who has good reasons for
breaking the rules."
   But why should this be so? Why should consistency be elevated
above all else? No, there were other more urgent reasons for Margaret's
following the rules, though these reasons are not explicit in the clinical
report: it is apparent that by avoiding decision Margaret avoided the
role of "decision maker." She embraced and cherished the comforting
illusion that there is some absolute external referent, that there is a pre-
scribed right and wrong. And, in so believing, Margaret avoided the
existential isolation inherent in her "real" situation-that is, that she
herself has fashioned her world and imbued it with structure and
meaning.
DECISION: CLINICAL STRATEGY AND TECHNIQUES
   Decision plays a central role in every successful course of therapy.
Even though a therapist may not explicitly focus on decision or even
acknowledge it, even though a therapist may believe that change is
brought about by exhortation or interpretation, or by virtue of the
therapeutic relationship, nonetheless it is a decision that slips the ma-
chinery of change into gear. No change is possible without effort, and
decision is the trigger of effort.
   Here I shall consider some therapeutic approaches to decision-both
conscious and unconscious decision. Some patients come to therapy in
328


 7 I Willing
the throes of some active decision making; some have periodic decision
crises during the course of therapy; others have long-term problems in
being unable to make decisions. Even though the therapist does not
formulate the patient's dynamics in terms of problems in decision mak-
ing, still the therapist's goal is, as I mentioned in the vignette at the be-
ginning of Part II, "to bring the patient to the point where he or she
can make a free choice."
   Therapeutic Approaches to Decision: Conscious Levels. Beatrice, a patient
in a therapy group, called me for an emergency session because of an
acute decisional crisis. Three months previously she had invited her
Italian boyfriend to live with her. At that time it appeared to be a short-
term arrangement, since he was slated to return to his own country in a
month. However, his departure date had been postponed, and their re-
lationship had rapidly deteriorated. He was drinking heavily, was ver-
bally abusive to her, and had borrowed large sums of money, her car,
and her apartment. Beatrice was overwhelmed with anxiety and in
great despair about her inability to act. Finally, after weeks of strug-
gling with the decision, she had asked him that morning to leave, but
he refused to go, stating he had no money and no place to stay. Fur-
thermore, since she had no lease on the apartment, he now had as
much right to it as she. She considered calling the police but doubted
that they could be effective because of the lack of a lease. Besides, she
dreaded angering her boyfriend because he had a bad temper and was
entirely capable of engaging in a prolonged vendetta against her.
   What should she do? He would leave in another four or five weeks;
she had hoped to stick it out till then, but the situation had so deterio-
rated that she no longer felt she could do so. If she asked him to leave,
he might harm her physically or destroy her furniture or car. Further-
more, it was vitally important to her that she end the relationship in a
way that would result in his continuing to care for her. What should
she do?
   Beatrice felt paralyzed, with apparently no possible course of effec-
tive action. During the emergency consultation she appeared so dis-
traught that I entertained the idea of hospitalizing her. I attempted di-
rectly to confront the decision panic and paralysis by asking
repeatedly, "What are your alternatives?" Beatrice felt that there were
none; but when I persisted, she i.1sted a number of options. She could
confront him much more openly, honestly, and forcibly than she had
before. She could let him know precisely how devastating an experi·
ence this had been for her, and how determined she was not to spend
another day with him in the apartment. She could insist that he leave,
                                                                         329


                                                     II I FREEDOM
and then she could seek legal advice and police protection. She could
enlist the help of some of her friends to help her confront him. She
could move out of the apartment (she had neither lease nor particular
attachment committing her to it). If she feared he would destroy her
furniture, then she could call a moving company and have her furni-
ture put into storage. (Expensive? Yes, but not as costly as the large
sums she was giving him.) She could easily stay with her sister, and so
on, and so on. By the end of this option-listing exercise, Beatrice no
longer felt trapped, her sense of paralysis had diminished, and she was
able to plan a course of action.
   The follow-up of this session leads into areas that are not entirely
germane to this discussion but that nonetheless illuminate the clinical
problems surrounding decision making sufficiently to warrant a di-
gression. Beatrice felt better after the session. She reviewed all her op-
tions and chose to confront her tormentor. She braced herself and
timorously told him that she could bear the situation no longer, and
asked him to leave. Although she had reported to me that she had spo-
ken so to him previously, the message had apparently not gotten
through since his response to this statement was immediate acquies-
cence. He packed up his belongings, found another place to stay, and
agreed to leave the next day!
   That evening she agreed to have a last dinner with him, and in the
course of conversation he remarked soulfully that it was a pity that two
rational individuals who liked one another could not find some way to
live together as good friends. And what did Beatrice reply? ''I'd like
that, too," she said. And so they unpacked his bags, and he settled in
again.
   In the therapy group four days later, Beatrice began the meeting
with a brief report of the incident. She described a brief argument, a
crisis session with me, a resolve to ask her boyfriend to leave, a rap-
prochement, and an ensuing couple of days of a dramatically improved
 relationship. She did not mention extraordinary distress, the abuse she
 had suffered, the drinking, the financial exploitation, the threats. I was
stunned by her account; and after Beatrice had finished, I told the
 group that I, too, had had an experience in the past week which I
wished to share with them. "A young woman in extraordinary anguish
called me," I began, and in that vein proceeded to describe my version
of our session. Indeed, the accounts were so different that it was sever-
 al minutes before the group realized that Beatrice and I had been de-
 scribing the same incident!
    Why did Beatrice distort the information she relayed to the group?
330


7 I Willing
Unconsciously she must have realized that, if she provided the
group-and, for that matter, herself-with an accurate portrayal of the
relationship, the members would conclude that she should end the re-
lationship. (And, indeed, every one of her friends had responded in
that fashion. Among the more dispassionate responses were, "Kick the
son of a bitch out!" "Are you crazy?" "Get rid of the jerk!" "Why do
you put up with that shit?") At a deep level, Beatrice appreciated that
she had made an irrational decision -one clearly not in her best inter-
ests. But she had decided, and she wished to avoid the anxiety of cogni-
tive dissonance. As she valued the opinions of the group members, it
was clearly in the interest of her personal comfort that she withhold
the facts that would allow them to conclude that she had decided
incorrectly.
   In my emergency session with her I had alleviated Beatrice's panic
by helping her consider the available options. That technique is gener-
ally effective in the face of decision panic; but it is important for the
therapist to keep in mind that it is the patient-not the therapist-who
must generate and choose among those options. In helping patients to
communicate effectively, one of the first principles psychotherapists
teach is that one "owns" one's feelings. It is equally important that one
owns one's decisions. A decision made by another is no decision at all:
one is not likely to commit oneself to it; and even if one does, no
change in the process of decision making has been effected-one will
not generalize to the next decision. The therapist must resist the pa-
tient's entreaties to make a decision. Neophyte therapists often suc-
cumb and fall into the trap of deciding for patients. Such a therapist
later feels not only disappointed but curiously betrayed or angry when
a patient fails to commit himself or herself to that decision. If the thera-
pist takes over the patient's decision-making function, then the entire
focus of therapy may be displaced from the crucial area of responsibil-
ity and decision to the area of obedience or defiance of authority.
   It is important to remember that deciding does not end either with a
decision or with a failure to make one. The individual must re-decide
over and over. Failing to carry out a decision does not "blow it" for
ever and need not carry implications for the next decision; and much
can be learned from such failure. There are times also when a patient is
not ready or able to make a decision: the alternatives are too equal; and
the patient's anxiety and anticipation of regret are too high, and his or
her awareness of the "meaning" of a decision (which I shall discuss
shortly) is too limited. The therapist may afford the patient much relief
by supporting the latter's decision not to decide at such a time.
                                                                         331


                                                          II I FREEDOM
   Many patients' decision-making abilities are paralyzed by "what ifs."
What if I quit this job and can't find another one? What if I leave my
children alone, and they get hurt? What if I consult another doctor, and
my pediatrician finds out about it? A logical, systematic analysis of the
possibilities is sometimes useful. The therapist may, for example, ask
the patient to consider the whole scenario of each "what if" in turn: to
fantasize its happening, with possible ramifications, and then to expe-
rience and analyze his or her emergent feelings.
   Though these conscious approaches have some usefulness, they have
severe limitations because so much of a decision dilemma exists at a
subterranean level and is impervious to a rational approach. Two thou-
sand years ago Aristotle said, I believe, that the whole is greater than
the sum of the parts, and folk wisdom has always reflected this insight,
as in the Yiddish joke about the kreplach aversion. A boy's mother is
trying to rid the child of his extraordinarily powerful repugnance to
kreplach (a meat-filled pastry). Painstakingly she prepares the kreplach
while he is in the kitchen. Patiently she presents and discusses each of
the ingredients. "See, you like flour, and eggs, and meat," and so on.
He agrees readily. "Well, then, that settles it, because that's all there is
in kreplach." But at the word "kreplach" the child once again promptly
retches.
   Therapeutic Approaches to Decision: Unconscious Levels. How can the
therapist approach the unconscious aspects of decision making-what
Farber refers to as the "first realm of will." The answer: "Indirectly."
Much as they might wish to, therapists cannot create will or commit-
ment, cannot flick the decision switch or inspirit a patient with reso-
luteness. But they can influence the factors that influence willing. No
one has a congenital absence of will. Part of one's constitutional heri-
tage, as Robert White 102 and Karen Horney 103 have ably argued, is a
drive toward effectance, toward mastering one's environment, toward
becoming what one is capable of becoming. Will is blocked by obstacles
in the path of the child's development; later these obstacles are inter-
nalized, and the individual is unable to act even though no objective
factors are blocking him or her. The therapist's task is to help remove
those obstacles. Once that is done, the individual will naturally devel-
op-just, as Horney put it, as an acorn develops into an oak. 104 Thus, the
therapist's task is not to create will but to disencumber it.
   I shall describe several approaches to this task. The therapist must
first help the patient become aware of the inevitability and the omni-
presence of decision. The therapist helps the patient "frame" or gain
perspective upon a particular decision, and then assists in laying bare
332


 7 I Willing
the deeper implications (the "meaning") of that decision. Finally,
through the leverage of insight the therapist attempts to awaken the
dormant will.
   The inevitability and the omnipresence of decision. One cannot not de-
cide. Much as each of us would like it otherwise, decisions are unavoid-
able. If it is true that one constitutes oneself, then it follows that deci-
sions are the atoms of the being that one creates. Acceptance of one's
decisions is a step first taken in therapy during the work of assumption
of responsibility. In later stages the therapeutic work consists of sharp-
ening and deepening that insight. The patient is helped not only to as-
sume responsibility but to discover, one by one, each of his or her
avoidance tactics.
   If one fully accepts the ubiquity of one's decisions, then one con-
fronts one's existential situation in authentic fashion. Procrastination is
a decision-as are failure, and drinking, and being seduced, exploited,
or trapped. One decides even to stay alive. Nietszche said that only
after one has fully considered suicide does one take one's life seriously.
Many cancer patients with whom I have worked have had adrenalecto-
mies (part of the treatment program of metastatic breast carcinoma) and
must take cortisone replacement therapy every day. Many take their
daily tablets as automatically as they brush their teeth, but others are
very much aware of making a decision every day to remain alive. My
impression is that awareness of this decision enriches life and encour-
ages one to commit oneself to the task of living as fully as possible.
  Some therapists reinforce a patient's awareness of the omnipresence
of decisions by reminding him or her of the decisions that must be
made about therapy. Thus, Kaiser, as we have seen, recommends a
therapeutic format with "no conditions" whatsoever, and Greenwald
persistently asks the patient to make decisions about the format of ther-
apy-that is, whether he or she wants to work on dreams, how many
sessions to meet, and so on. 105
  Therapists should help patients become fully aware of meta-deci-
sions-that is, decisions about decisions-for some individuals attempt
to deny the importance of decisions by persuading themselves that
they have decided not to decide. Such a decision is in actuality a deci-
sion not to decide actively. One cannot evade decision altogether, but
one may decide to decide passively-by, for example, letting another
decide for one. I believe that the way one makes a decision is of the ut-
most importance. An active approach to decision is consonant with an
active acceptance of one's own power and resources.
  Many of the patients I described earlier illustrate this principle. For
                                                                        333


                                                     II I FREEDOM
example, Beatrice, whose boyfriend would not leave her apartment had
little question about which decision was in her best interests. When I
asked her to imagine how she would feel a month hence when he fi-
nally left the country, her response was a full-bodied "blissful." The
patient who prayed that she could catch her husband in bed with an-
other woman also had little question about what she wanted. However,
each woman balked at making an active decision to throw out the man
in her life; and, by arranging for another to make that decision, each
had made another decision to decide passively. Each, however, paid a
price for the decision about how to decide. Both patients had severely
impaired self-esteem, and the way by which they avoided decisions
contributed to that self-contempt. If one is to love oneself, one must be-
have in ways that one can admire.
   My patient Bill agonized for a year about ending a relationship with
a woman, Jean. I had persistently taken the approach that the way he
made the decision was extremely important, but he persistently denied
that he was deciding. He said he could not decide about the relation-
ship because his work was overwhelming, and Jean was being very
helpful to him in it. I reminded him that he chose to invite her to come
to his office in the evenings to help him. Jean was wonderfully sup-
portive when he was in a crisis, he said. I suggested that not only did
he have some choice about entering a crisis (for example, by needlessly
missing a deadline at work and, as a result, having a humiliating con-
frontation with his boss), but that he freely had chosen to tell Jean
about his crisis and to solicit her help.
   Finally Bill made a decision to terminate the relationship, but it was
a decision he concealed from himself. The decision was to decide pas-
sively: to persuade Jean to terminate the relationship. He chose a plan
of subtle, gradual disengagement; he gave Jean so little affection that
eventually she left him for another man. He had gone through this cy-
cle on many previous occasions, and each time he was left feeling re-
jected and worthless. Bill's primary problem was that he was flooded
with self-contempt; an important function of therapy was to help him
understand that the ignoble way he made decisions contributed to his
self-contempt.
   Framing a decision. In describing the difference between the two
realms of will (conscious and unconscious), Farber says, you can will
"going to bed but not going to sleep." 106 The therapist may occasionally
be able to influence the deeper levels of will by changing the frame of
a decision, by providing the patient with a different perspective on a
decision. A personal incident is illustrative.
   Once many years ago I had a severe siege of insomnia. The insomnia
334


7 I Willing
was linked to tension and was greatly exacerbated whenever I traveled
to deliver a lecture. I was particularly apprehensive about an upcoming
lecture trip to Cleveland, which I considered a "bad sleeping city" be-
cause I had once spent an extraordinarily uncomfortable, sleepless
night there. This apprehension, of course, initiates a vicious circle:
anxiety about not sleeping begets insomnia.
   I have always takeri advantage of episodes of personal distress to fa-
miliarize myself with various approaches to therapy, and on this occa-
sion I consulted a behavior therapist. In the four to five sessions I met
with him, we worked with a systematic desensitization approach and
with muscular relaxation tapes, neither of which was particularly help-
ful. However, as I was leaving his office after a session, the therapist
made a casual remark that proved of enormous benefit. He said, "When
you're packing your bag to go to Cleveland, don't forget to put in are-
volver." "Why"? I asked him. "Well," he replied, "if you can't sleep
you can always shoot yourself." That comment "clicked" deep inside;
and even now, years later, I regard it as an inspired therapeutic
maneuver.
   How did it work? It is difficult to explain precisely, but it reframed
the situation and put it into a meaningful existential perspective. This
is precisely the experience that I have observed in patients who have
had some massive encounter with death. In chapter 2, I described a
patient with advanced cancer who reported that her confrontation
with death allowed her to "trivialize the trivia in life" or to stop doing
those things she did not wish to do. Such patients, as a result of an en-
counter with death, have been able to remove the frame surrounding
their everyday life and to experience the relative unimportance of
everyday decisions from the perspective of their one and only life
cycle.
   If all but a small segment of a large tapestry is covered from view,
then the details of that small segment emerge and appropriate a new
vividness-a vividness that pales when the rest of the tapestry is again
uncovered. Similarly, the "shift of perspective" technique is a process
of deframing and uncovering. But how does the therapist deframe and
unveil the tapestry of existence? Some therapists make an explicit ap-
peal to reason. For example, I have observed how Viktor Frankl, an ex-
istential therapist, attempted to treat a patient who was being smoth-
ered by a series of tormenting decisions: Frankl asked him to meditate
upon his core being and then suggested that he simply draw a line
around this core and become aware of the fact that these decisions in-
volved concerns in outlying and, in the long run, petty areas of life.
   Such appeals to reason, however, are generally ineffective in gener-
                                                                       335


                                                     II I FREEDOM
ating a major shift of perspective. What is often required is some imme-
diate confrontation with a boundary situation that propels the individ-
ual into an awareness of his or her existential situation. Accordingly,
many of the techniques I have described in chapter 5 to help one to
confront one's own mortality will often influence the decision process.
   The meaning of decision. Every decision has a visible conscious com-
ponent and a massive, submerged unconscious component. A decision
 has its own dynamics and is a choice among several factors, some of
which are beyond awareness. To help a patient caught in the throes of
a particularly tormenting decision, the therapist must inquire about its
many subterranean, unconscious meanings. A decision with which
Emma, a sixty-six-year-old widow, struggled is illustrative.
   Emma asked to be seen because of her anguish about whether to de-
cide to sell her summer home, a luxurious estate about one hundred
and fifty miles away from her permanent residence. The house re-
quired frequent visits, constant attention to gardening, maintenance,
police protection, and servants, as well as a substantial expense for up-
keep. It seemed an unnecessary burden to a frail old woman in poor
health. There were, of course, financial factors to consider. Was the
market at its peak, or would the estate continue to increase in value?
Could she invest the money more profitably elsewhere? Emma rumi-
nated continuously about these issues. But though they were important
and complex, they seemed insufficient to account for her profound dis-
tress. Accordingly, I proceeded to explore the deeper meaning of her
decision.
   Her husband had died a year ago, and she mourned him yet. They
had spent many a good summer together at the house, and every room
was rich still with his presence. Emma had changed the house very lit-
tle: every nook and corner contained her husband's personal effects;
drawers and closets brimmed with his clothes. She clung to the house
just as she clung to his memory. Thus, a decision to sell the house re-
quired a deeper decision for Emma-a decision to come to terms with
 her loss and with the fact that her husband would never return.
   The house was so often visited by large numbers of friends that she
 referred to it as her "hotel." Though she hated the long three-hour
drive and resented the expenses of entertaining, she also was extreme-
 ly lonely and felt grateful for the companionship. Emma had always
 felt that she had few internal provisions to offer friends, and since her
 husband's death she had felt particularly depleted and superfluous.
 "Who would," she thought, "visit me to see me?" The house was her
 drawing card. Thus, a decison to sell the house meant testing the loyal-
 ty of her friends and risking loneliness and isolation.
336


7 I Willing
   Her father had designed and built the house, and the land on which
it stood had been in her family for generations. The great tragedy of
Emma's life had been that she had no children. She had always envis-
aged the estate passing on through time to her children and to her chil-
dren's children. But she was the last leaf; the line ended with her. A
decision to sell the house thus was a decision to acknowledge the fail-
ure of one of her major symbolic immortality projects.
   Emma's decision, then, was no ordinary one. When the meaning of
her decision was explored, it became clear that the implications were
indeed staggering: she was deciding whether to punctuate the loss of
her husband, to confront isolation and possible loneliness, and to ac-
cept her own finiteness. If I had been content to help her decide on the
basis of convenience, poor health, or financial factors, I would have
missed both the whole point of Emma's turmoil and the opportunity to
help her in a fundamental way. I used the house-selling decision as a
springboard to these deeper issues and helped Emma mourn both her
husband, herself, and her unborn children. Once the deeper meanings
of a decision are worked through, the decision itself generally glides
easily into place; and after a dozen sessions Emma effortlessly made the
decision to sell the house.
   Many therapists today inquire about the "meaning" of a decision
when they explore the "payoff" of a decision. Greenwald, who bases
an entire approach ("decision therapy") to psychotherapy around deci-
sion making, emphasizes the importance of investigating payoffs. 107 In
every decision there are payoffs-some conscious, some unconscious. If
the patient is unable to stick with a decision, the therapist must assume
that the patient has made another decision, which has its own corpus
of payoffs. If the patient wishes to change but cannot decide to change,
the therapist may focus, not on the refusal to decide, but on the deci-
sion that was in fact made-the patient's decision to stay the way he or
she is. Staying sick is a decison and invariably has tangible or symbolic
payoffs-for example, the patient may obtain a pension, the solicitude
of friends, or the therapist's continued ministrations.
   A decison will not stick unless one "owns" it and recognizes and dis-
cards the payoffs of opposing decisions. Thus, of a patient who ex-
presses the wish to kick a narcotic habit, Greenwald asks, "Why?" and
explores with him or her all the payoffs of drug taking-such as anxi-
ety relief, euphoria, or absolution from responsibility. 108 One is more
likely to "own" a decision if one discovers the limits to each of the op-
posing payoffs. Two patients in a therapy group that I conducted want-
ed to have a sexual relationship but decided not to because of my
"rules." I pointed out that I had made no rules and then asked the pa-
                                                                      337


                                                      II I FREEDOM
tients about the "payoffs" of their decision. When they had fully dis-
cussed their awareness both that the group meant a great deal to them,
and that a sexual relationship would sabotage the group, the decision
became their decision, and much more firmly rooted than if I, the thera-
pist, had made it for them.
   "Payoff" is a new term but an old concept. Whether we speak of ex-
ploring "meaning" or "payoff" or "secondary gratification," we are re-
ferring to the fact that every decision that one makes has benefits for
that individual. If the decision seems to be self-destructive, we will in-
variably find that it makes sense in the patient's experiential world,
and that in some highly personalized or symbolic mode, it is self-pre-
servative. However, there will be many decisions whose full meaning
the therapist will find difficult to comprehend, because of their deep
roots in the unconscious.
INSIGHT AND DECISION
   The precise relationship between insight and the decision to change
has always remained elusive. Although psychoanalytic texts generally
equate insight and change, they employ a circular type of logic that
guarantees the truth of the proposition that the reason the patient does
not change is that he or she has not acquired enough insight. The issue
is made even more problematic by the lack of a precise definition of
"insight." In its broadest clinical sense, "insight" refers to self-discov-
ery-a "sighting inwards." But clinicians differ widely in their concep-
tion of the type of self-discovery that instigates change. Is it insight into
the way one behaves with other individuals? or insight into the cur-
rent motivation behind one's behavior? or insight into childhood
sources, often erroneously referred to as the genetic "causes," of behav-
ior? Freud always held that mutative insight was insight into the early
sources of behavior, and believed that successful therapy hinged on the
excavation of the earliest layers of life's memories. Other therapists be-
lieve that effective insight is the discovery of currently active dynam-
ics. For example, Emma, the widow faced with the decision to sell her
summer home, improved by discovering the currently active dynamics
without considering the genetic issue, or "How did you get to be that
way?"
   Is insight always necessary? Most assuredly not. Every clinician has
worked with patients who have undergone substantial change in the
absence of insight. Earlier I discussed those who changed as a result of
 some radical shift in perspective-a shift that often one can explain
 only with a pallid "I learned to count my blessings," or "I decided to
338


7 I Willing
live my life rather than postpone it" -comments that hardly qualify as
insight. Individuals go through therapy in a variety of ways: some
profit from insight; some from other mechanisms of change; some may
even obtain insight as a result of change, rather than the other way
around. May states, "I cannot perceive something until I can conceive
it." 109 One is often unable to perceive truths about oneself only after
taking some stand toward change. Once having made a decision, once
having put oneself on record to oneself, then one has constituted one's
world differently and is able to seize truths that one had previously
hidden from oneself.
   Though there is considerable discussion and controversy about the
type of insight most likely to produce change, the literature is relatively
silent about how insight effects change. Many of the traditional expla-
nations-for example, making the unconscious conscious, undermin-
ing resistance, the working through of the past, the reintegration of
dissociated material, a corrective emotional experience-all elaborate
upon the problem but still beg the question and fall short of providing
a precise mechanism of the influence of insight.
   The psychological construct of willing and particularly the concept
of decision-that process that stretches from wish into action-pro-
vides the clinician with a model to explain how insight catalyzes
change. The therapist's task is to disencumber will; insight is one of the
important tools that the therapist can use to accomplish that task.
   In the following section I shall argue that insight effects change
through (1) facilitating the development of the therapist-patient rela-
tionship, and (2) a series of maneuvers that help the therapist liberate
the patient's stifled will: these maneuvers are designed to enable pa-
tients to realize that only they can change the world they have created;
that there is no danger in change; that to get what they really want,
they must change; and that each individual has the power to change.
FACILITATION OF THE PATIENT-THERAPIST RELATIONSHIP
   An accepting, trusting patient-therapist relationship is crucial to the
process of change. As a result of the therapist's concern and uncondi-
tional regard, the patient's self-love and self-regard gradually increase.
Self-regard begets a belief that one has the right to wish and to act. The
patient's will is first exercised in the therapeutic arena where it is accept-
ed and reinforced by the therapist. Once the patient's belief in the de-
structiveness of his or her will is disconfirmed in the therapeutic situa-
tion, he or she is gradually able to will effectively in other domains.
   How does insight catalyze the therapeutic relationship? Indirectly!
                                                                          339


                                                      II I FREEDOM
Insight is an epiphenomenon-a means to a means to an end. It is a fer-
tilizer of the relationship! The search for understanding provides a
context for the formation of the therapist-patient relationship; it is the
glue that binds patient and therapist together; it keeps them occupied
in a mutually satisfying task (The patient is gratified by having his or
her inner world scrutinized with such thoroughness; the therapist is
charmed by the intellectual challenge); and all the while the real agent
of change, the therapeutic relationship, is silently germinating.
LEVERAGE-PRODUCING INSIGHTS
   In addition to its function in the development of the therapist-pa-
tient relationship, insight may catalyze willing more directly. The
therapist assists the patient in obtaining self-knowledge that applies le-
verage to the will. The following "insights" are four of the most com-
mon leverage-producing statements made by the therapist to the will-
stifled patient.
   "Only I can change the world I have created." In the previous chapter I
described many techniques to help patients become aware of their re-
sponsibility for their life predicaments. Once a patient truly grasps the
full implications of his or her responsibility, then the therapist must
help that patient to understand that responsibility is continuous: one
does not create one's situation in life once and for all; rather, one is
continuously creating oneself. Thus, responsibility for past creation im-
plies responsibility for future change. Next, the therapist helps the pa-
tient take the short step toward realizing that, just as one is solely re-
sponsible for being what one is, one is solely responsible for changing
what one is. A patient who is to change must arrive at the insight: "If I,
and only I, have created my world, then only I can change it." Change
is an active process: it will not occur unless we actively change. No one
else can change us or change for us.
   This insight is at once simplistic and profound. Though the insight is
easily stated, and its mechanism fundamentally exhortative, nonethe-
less its implications run very deep.
   "There is no danger in change." Many patients cannot make the cru-
cial decision to change because of a powerful, often unconscious belief
that some calamity would befall them if they were to change. The na-
ture of the fantasied calamity varies from person to person: one fears
being engulfed if he or she were to engage another; another fears rejec-
tion or humiliation if he or she were to be more spontaneous or self-
disclosing, or catastrophic retribution as a result of self-assertion, or
abandonment and isolation as a result of autonomous behavior.
   These fantasied calamities are encumbrances to the will, and the
340


7 I Willing
therapist must search for methods to eliminate these encumbrances.
The process of identifying and naming the fantasied calamity may in
itself enable a patient to understand how far his or her fears are re-
moved from reality. Another approach is to encourage the patient to
perform by degrees in the therapy session various aspects of the behav-
ior whose consequences the patient dreads. The fantasied calamity does
not, of course, ensue, and the dread is gradually extinguished. For ex-
ample, a patient may avoid aggressive behavior out of a deep-seated
fear of having a dammed-up reservoir of homicidal fury that requires
constant vigilance lest it be unleashed and bring down on the patient
retribution from others. The therapist helps such a patient express ag-
gression in carefully calibrated doses in therapy: pique at being inter-
rupted, irritation at the therapist's fallibility, anger at the therapist for
charging him money, and so on. Gradually the patient learns to de-
mythologize himself as an alien and homicidal being.
   "To get what I really want, I must change." What prevents individuals
from making decisions that are clearly in their best interests? An obvi-
ous answer is that the patient who seems to be sabotaging his or her
own mature needs and goals, is satisfying another set of needs that are
often unconscious and that are incompatible with the first. In other
words, the patient has conflicting motivations that cannot be simulta-
neously satisfied. For example, the patient may consciously wish toes-
tablish mature heterosexual relationships, but unconsciously wish to be
nurtured, to be cradled endlessly, to be sheltered from the terrifying
freedom of adulthood, or-to use another vocabulary in the case of a
man-to assuage castration anxiety by a maternal identification. Obvi-
ously the patient cannot satisfy both sets of wishes: he cannot establish
an adult heterosexual relationship with a woman if he is saying sotto
voce, "Take care of me, protect me, nurse me, let me be a part of you."
   The therapist uses insight to attack this obstacle to the functioning of
the will and helps the patient to become aware that he or she has con-
flicting needs and goals, and that each decision, including a decision
not to decide, satisfies some needs-that is, has some "payoff." When
the patient is fully aware of the nature of his or her conflicting needs,
the therapist helps the former to realize that since all needs cannot be
satisfied, the patient must choose among them and relinquish those
that cannot be fulfilled except at enormous cost to his or her integrity
and autonomy. Once the patient realizes what he or she "really" wants
(as an adult), and that his or her behavior has been designed to fulfill
opposing growth-retarding needs, he or she gradually concludes that
"to get what I really want, I must change."
   "I have the power to change." Many individuals are aware that they
                                                                          341


                                                        II I FREEDOM
do not, will not, make decisions that are in their best interests. Their
internal experience is one of confusion-spawned impotence; they expe-
rience themselves as victims rather than masters of their conduct. As
long as this subjective state prevails, there is little possibility of willful,
constructive action on the part of a patient.
   The therapist attempts to counter the patient's confusion and impo-
tence with explanation, and says in effect, "You behave in certain fash-
ions because .... " The "because" clause generally involves motiva-
tional factors that lie outside the patient's awareness. How does this
strategy help the patient change?
   Explanation is a potent enemy of the powerlessness that emanates
from ignorance. Explanation, identifying, and labeling are all part of
the natural sequence of the development of mastery-or of a sense of
mastery which, in turn, begets effective behavior. Human beings have
always abhorred uncertainty and have sought through the ages to or-
der the universe by providing explanations, primarily religious or sci-
entific. The explanation of a phenomenon is the first step toward con-
trol of that phenomenon. If, for example, natives live in terror of the
unpredictable eruptions of a nearby volcano, their first step toward
mastery of their situation is explanation. They may, for example, ex-
plain the volcano's eruption as the behavior of a displeased volcano
god. Although their external circumstances may be entirely the same,
their phenomenological world is altered by explanation. Further-
more-and this is very important-a course of action is available that
augments their sense of mastery: if the volcano explodes because the
god is displeased, then there must be methods of placating and eventu-
ally controlling the god.
   Jerome Frank, in a study of Americans' reactions to an unfamiliar
South Pacific disease (schistosomiasis) demonstrated that secondary
anxiety stemming from uncertainty often creates more havoc than does
the primary disease. 110 Similarly with psychiatric patients: fear and
anxiety that stem from uncertainty of the source, the meaning, and the
seriousness of psychiatric symptoms may so compound the total dys-
phoria that effective exploration becomes vastly more difficult. The
 therapist may effectively intervene by providing a patient with an ex-
 planation that allows that patient to view his or her dysphoria in some
 coherent and predictable schema. Through explanation the therapist
 helps a patient to order previously unfamiliar phenomena and to expe-
 rience them as being under his or her control. Thus, insight permits a
 patient to feel, "I am potent, I have the power to change."
    The implication of this sequence is that it is primarily the process
342


7 I Willing
(that is, the provision of insight), rather than the precise content of the
insight, that is important. The function of the interpretation is to pro-
vide the patient with a sense of mastery; accordingly, the value of an
interpretation should be measured by this criterion. To the extent that
it offers a sense of potency, insight is valid, correct, or "true." Such a
definition of truth is completely relativistic and pragmatic. It argues
that no explanatory system has hegemony or exclusive rights, that no
system is the correct, the fundamental, or the "deeper" -and therefore
better-one.
   In a study of encounter groups my colleagues and I learned that posi-
tive outcome was highly correlated with insight. 111 Those subjects who
obtained insight and were able to organize their experience in some co-
herent pattern had a positive outcome. Furthermore, the successful
group leaders were those who provided some type of cognitive frame-
work for their members. The type of insight that the successful mem-
bers had, and the specific content of the ideological school from which
the successful leaders sprang, had little to do with the positive out-
come. The important feature was not what they had learned but that
they had learned.
   Therapists may offer the patient any of a number of explanations to
clarify the same issue; each may be made from a different frame of ref-
erence (for example, Freudian, Jungian, Horneyan, Sullivanian, Adler-
ian, and transactional analytic) and each may be "true" in that each
provides an explanation that begets a sense of potency. None, despite
vehement claims to the contrary, has sole rights to the truth. After all,
they are all based on imaginary "as if" structures. They all say, "You
are behaving (or feeling) as if such and such a thing were true."
   The superego, the id, the ego; the archetypes, the idealized and the
actual selves, the pride system; the self system and the dissociated sys-
tem, the masculine protest; parent, child, and adult ego states-none of
these really exists. They are all fictions, all psychological constructs cre-
ated for semantic convenience, and they justify their existence only by
virtue of their explanatory power. The concept of the will provides a
central organizing principle for these diverse explanatory systems.
They all act by the same mechanism: they are effective to the degree
that they afford a sense of personal mastery and thus inspirit the dor-
mant will.
   Does this mean that psychotherapists abandon their attempts to
make precise, thoughtful interpretations? Not at all. Only that they rec-
ognize the purpose and function of an interpretation. Some interpreta-
tions may be superior to others, not because they are "deeper" but be-
                                                                         343


                                                       II I FREEDOM
cause they have more explanatory power, are more credible, provide
 more mastery, and therefore better catalyze the will. Interpretations, to
be truly effective, must be tailored for the recipient; in general, they
 are more effective if they make sense, if they are logically consistent
 with sound supporting arguments, if they are bolstered by empirical
 observation, if they are consonant with the patient's frame of refer-
 ence, if they "feel" right, if they "click" with the internal experience of
 the patient, and if they can be applied to many analogous situations in
 the life of the patient. Global interpretations generally offer a novel ex-
 planation to the patient for some large pattern of behavior (as opposed
 to a single trait or act). The novelty of the therapist's explanation stems
 from his unusual frame of reference, which pe~mits him to unify data
 about the patient in an original fashion; indeed, often this data is mate-
 rial that has been overlooked by, or is out of the awareness of, the
 patient.
    When I present this relativistic thesis to students, they respond with
such questions as "Do you mean that an astrological explanation is also
 valid in psychotherapy?" In spite of my own intellectual reservations, I
 have to respond affirmatively. If an astrological or a shamanistic or a
magical explanation enhances one's sense of mastery, and leads to in-
 ner, personal change, then it is valid (keeping in mind the proviso that
 it must be consonant with one's frame of reference). There is much evi-
 dence from cross-cultural psychiatric research to support my position;
 in most primitive cultures only the magical or the religious explanation
 is acceptable, and hence valid and effective.
    An interpretation, even the most elegant one, has no benefit if a pa-
 tient does not hear it. The therapist should take pains to review some
 of the evidence with the patient and to prese~t the explanation clearly.
 (A therapist who cannot do so does not understand the explanation; it
 is not, as some claim, because the therapist is speaking directly to the
 patient's unconscious.) A patient may not be able to accept an interpre-
 tation the first time a therapist makes it, but may hear the same inter-
 pretation many times until one day it seems to click. Why does it click
 that one day? The important thing for the therapist to recognize is that,
 even though it appears that a decision to change may be made in an as-
 tonishingly short period of time, nevertheless the groundwork for that
 change often takes many, many long months or even years. Many
 therapists are impressed and puzzled by reports of individuals whore-
 port a dramatic, sudden life transformation as a result of some brief
 therapeutic encounter or short participation in a personal growth
 workshop. It is extremely difficult to evaluate these reports. Richard
344


7 I Willing
Nisbett and Tim Wilson have demonstrated that individuals who make
decisions are often inaccurate in their descriptions of the antecedents
of that decision. 112 From my interviews with those who have under-
gone dramatic breakthroughs I have found that these life transforma-
tions are by no means sudden: the groundwork for change has been
laid over preceding weeks, months, and years. By the time they have
reached the point of seeking therapy or some other type of personal
g-:-owth experience, many individuals have already, at a deep level,
done the work and are on the brink of dramatic change. In these in-
stances therapy-that is, the decision to seek therapy-is the manifesta-
tion, not the cause, of change.
   Decisions to change generally require considerable time, and the
therapist must exercise patience. Interpretations must be properly
timed. The experienced therapist knows that an interpretation prema-
turely given will have little therapeutic impact. An illustrative clinical
example is provided by a patient in a therapy group who had been in-
volved for several years in an exceedingly unsatisfying marriage. All
attempts to improve the marriage had failed; and though she realized
that it was destroying her, she clung to it because she was terrified of
facing life alone. She perceived her husband not as a real person but as
a figure who protected her from loneliness. Though the relationship
was obviously unsatisfactory, she was so terrified of losing it that she
refused to commit herself to a plan for change. Without any real relat-
edness and without any commitment for change, there was little possi-
bility of the marriage working. It seemed clear to me that only if she
could face separateness and autonomy could she have a chance at a
genuine, undistorted human encounter. Consequently, I ventured the
opinion: "Only if you are willing to give up the marriage can you save it."
That interpretation was deeply meaningful to her: she said that it
struck her like a thunderbolt; and subsequently it catalyzed consider-
able change.
   The fascinating aspect of this situation was that she had been in a
therapy group after each meeting of which I had for many years writ-
ten a summary to mail to the group members before the following ses-
sion (see my book on group therapy 113 for the rationale of this proce-
dure). Thus, there was a written history of the therapy group-a
chronicle that the patients had read after each meeting. This particular
patient was an assiduous reader of the summaries and filed them, so
that she had an ongoing log of the group to which she referred from
time to time. Shortly after I made this effective interpretation to her, I
reviewed the summaries of the group over the past couple of years in
                                                                      345


                                                      II I FREEDOM
conjunction with some writing I was doing, and discovered, to my as-
tonishment, that I had made the precise interpretation to her one year
previously! Though the wording was identical and the interpretation
had been underscored and heavily emphasized, she had not heard it
previously because she was not ready to hear it.
           The Past versus the Future in Psychotherapy
It is a matter of no small significance that the word "will" has a double
meaning: it suggests resolution and determination, and it also denotes
the future tense-"I will do it-not at this moment, but in the future."
As every therapist recognizes, psychotherapy is successful to the extent
that it allows the patient to alter his or her future. Yet it is not the fu-
ture but the past tense that dominates psychotherapy literature. To a
large extent this domination by the past is a result of a confusion be-
tween explanation and "originology ." Psychotherapists, especially
those of a Freudian persuasion, often believe that in order to explain
something-that is, to provide insight-one must lay bare its origins
or, at the very least, relate the present event to some past situation. In
this frame of reference, the causes of individual behavior are to be
found in antecedent circumstances of a person's life.
   Yet, as I suggested in the previous section, there are many modes of
explanation or systems of causality that do not rely on the past. For ex-
ample, the future (our present idea about the future) is, no less than the
past, a powerful determinant of behavior, and the concept of future de-
terminism is fully defensible. The "not yet" influences our behavior in
many, formidable ways. Within one, at both conscious and unconscious
levels, there is a sense of purpose, an idealized self, a series of goals for
which one strives, an awareness of destiny and of ultimate death.
These constructs all stretch into the future, yet they powerfully influ-
ence inner experience and behavior.
   Another mode of explanation applies a Galilean concept of causality
which stresses the current field forces operating upon the individual.
As we hurtle through space, our behavioral trajectories are influenced
not only by the nature and the direction of the original push and the
nature of the goal that beckons, but also by all the current field forces
operating upon them. Thus, the therapist may "explain" a patient's be-
havior by examining the concentric rings of conscious and unconscious
346


 7 I Willing
current motivations which envelop that individual. Consider, for ex-
ample, one who has a strong inclination to attack others. Exploration of
this behavior may reveal that the patient's aggression is a reaction for-
mation concealing a layer of strong dependency wishes that are not ex-
pressed because of anticipation of rejection. This explanation need not
include the question "How did the patient get that way?"
   Still, the therapist's natural tendency is to focus on the past in psy-
chotherapy. Most long-term intensive treatment devotes much energy
to looking backward. Long developmental histories are gathered, recol-
lections about one's early relations with parents and siblings are ex-
plored at length, early memories and infantile roots of dreams are
painstakingly examined. Freud laid the foundations of this approach.
He was a committed psycho-archeologist who, to the end of his life, be-
lieved that the excavation of the past was essential, even tantamount, to
successful therapy. In fact, in one of his last papers he makes an ex-
tended comparison between the work of the analyst and that of the
professional archeologist. He describes the therapist's task as "con-
struction of the past":
        We all know that the person who is being analyzed has to be induced to
        remember something that has been experienced by him and repressed.
       The analyst has neither experienced nor repressed any of the material
        under consideration; his task cannot be to remember anything. What
        then is his task? His task is to make out what has been forgotten from the
        traces which it has left behind or, more correctly, to construct . ... His
        work of construction, or, if it is preferred, of reconstruction, resembles to
       a great extent an archeologist's excavation of some dwelling place that
        has been destroyed and buried. The two practices are in fact identical,
       except that the analyst works under better conditions and has more ma-
        terial at his command to assist him.'"
Freud goes on to argue that the therapist, like the archaeologist, must
often reconstruct the available fragments (as supplied by the patient)
and then offer this construction to the patient. In fact, Freud suggests
that the word "construction" is a more appropriate label than "inter-
pretation" for the therapist's activity. An analyst who is not successful
in helping the patient to recollect the past should, Freud suggests,
nonetheless give the patient a construction of the past as the analyst
sees it. Freud believed that this construction would offer the same
therapeutic benefit as would actual recollection of past material:
       Quite often we do not succeed in bringing the patient to recollect what
       has been repressed. Instead of that, if the analysis is carried out correct-
       ly, we produce in him an assured conviction of the truth of the construction
        which achieves the same therapeutic results as a recaptured memory. 116
                                                                                347


                                                        II I FREEDOM
This latter remarkable statement is in agreement with the point I made
earlier-namely, that it is not the content but the process of interpreta-
tion or explanation that is important.
   Freud's emphasis on reconstruction of the past as an explanatory sys-
tem is intimately related to his deterministic doctrine: all behavior and
mental experience are the result of antecedent events-events either
environmental or instinctual in nature. The problem with such an ex-
planatory system is that it contains within it the seeds of therapeutic
despair. If we are determined by the past, whence comes the ability to
change? It is evident from Freud's later works, especially Analysis Ter-
minable and Interminable, that his uncompromising deterministic view of
man led him to a position of therapeutic nihilism.
   Any system that explains behavior and mental experience on the ba-
sis of phenomena (for example, past or present environmental events,
instinctual drives) outside the domain of individual responsibility
leads to a treacherous position for the therapist. As Rank puts it: "The
causaLity principle means the denial of the will principle since it makes
the feeling, thinking and acting of the individual dependent on forces
outside of himself and thus frees him from responsibility and guilt." 116
   Of course, it is often useful to free oneself from guilt about past
events and actions. The therapist who adheres to a deterministic doc-
trine is able to examine the past in such a way as to demonstrate to the
patient that he or she was a victim of environmental events-that, giv-
en the circumstances, he or she could not have acted differently. Thus,
exploration of the past serves to absolve guilt but leaves the therapist
with the problem of how to deal with the past from one frame of refer-
ence (to offer absolution) and the future with another (to invoke
responsibility).
   Gatch and Temerlin studied transcripts of twenty therapists-ten
Freudian and ten existential analysts-to determine how they dealt
with this paradox. 117 They found that, as expected, the existential thera-
pists made significantly more comments that underscored the patients'
choices, freedom, and responsibility. However, none of the twenty
therapists ever spoke as if patients were currently victims of circum-
stances beyond their control. For a patient contemplating change, all
therapists attempted to acknowledge and to underscore the alternatives
available to that patient. Furthermore, when a patient spoke of his or
her infancy or childhood, all therapists appeared to take a deterministic
position: that circumstances had been beyond the control of the patient
as a child.
   It is apparent, then, that therapists learn to live with this inconsistent
348


 7 I Willing
position. They may reduce the inconsistency by ameliorating the deter-
ministic doctrine to one of reciprocal determinism: they assume that in
the past the coefficient of adversity was too great; that, given the pa-
tient's youth and experience and the power of adult forces acting upon
him, he or she could not have acted otherwise.
   Most existential therapists tend to focus less on the past than do
therapists of other persuasions, and more on the future tense, on the
decisions beckoning one, the goals stretching out before one. When ex-
istential therapists deal with guilt, it is not for the bad choices made
but for the refusal to make new ones. It is extraordinarily difficult to
absolve guilt for the past in the presence of ongoing guilt-provoking
behavior. One must learn first to forgive oneself for the present and
the future. So long as one continues to operate toward the self in the
present in the same way that one has acted in the past, then one cannot
forgive oneself for the past. But even when working with the past, it is
important that the individual does not assume disproportionate re-
sponsibility. One important concept is the categorical imperative for
responsibility: what is true for one regarding responsibility is true for
all. Many individuals assume excessive responsibility and guilt for oth-
ers' actions and feelings. Though the patient may truly have trans-
gressed against another, there's also a realm of responsibility of the
other who allowed him- or herself to be hurt, scorned, or otherwise
mistreated by the patient. Thus, the therapist must help the patient lo-
cate the boundaries of responsibility.
   Not only is there serious question about the therapeutic efficacy of a
causal explanatory system based on the past, but there is a serious
methodological problem-namely, that psychological reality is not
identical with historical reality. As Rank notes, Freud's natural science
ideology led him to attempt to reconstruct the historical past from the
patient's recollection of it. But "the reconstruction of the past depends
not on the facts but on the attitude or reaction of the individual to
them .... The problem of the past is a problem of memory and there-
fore a problem of consciousness." 118 In other words, the past is reconsti-
tuted by the present. Even in a lengthy anamnesis, one recalls only a
minute fraction of one's past experience and may selectively recall and
synthesize the past so as to achieve consistency with one's present view
of oneself. (Coffman, for this reason, suggests the term "apologia" for
this reconstruction of the past.) 119 As one through therapy changes
one's present image of oneself, one may reconstitute or reintegrate
one's past; for example, one may recall long-forgotten positive experi-
ences with parents. One may humanize them and, rather than experi-
encing them solipsistically (as figures who existed by virtue of their
                                                                       349


                                                         II I FREEDOM
service to one), one may begin to understand them as harried, well-in-
tentioned individuals struggling with the same overwhelming facts of
the human condition that anyone faces. This process is epitomized in a
remark attributed to Mark Twain: "When I was seventeen I was con-
vinced my father was a damn fool. When I was twenty-one I was as-
tounded by how much the old man had learned in four years."
   The hermeneutic approach to interpretation considers the relation-
ship between understanding and background: it posits that grasping an
understanding requires a certain background, but that this new under-
standing alters the perception of the background. Consequently, inter-
pretation is an organic process in which background and understand-
ing sequentially reconstitute one another. The same principle applies
to the relationship between past and present: a human being's past, un-
like the ruins of some ancient temple, is neither fixed nor finite; it is
constituted by the present and, in its ever-changing symbolic imma-
nence, influences the present.
   If the past as a system of explanation is of limited value, what role
does the past play in the process of psychotherapy? Earlier I alluded to
the role of the search for genetic insight in the development of the
therapeutic relationship. The intellectual venture, which Freud likens
to an archeological dig, provides a shared, apparently meaningful ac-
tivity in which patient and therapist engage, while the real agent of
change, the therapeutic relationship, unfolds. But the past facilitates re-
lationship in another important manner: the explicit understanding of
the early development of a particular interpersonal stance enhances
the possibility of engagement. For example, a woman with a regal air
conveying hauteur and condescension may suddenly seem under-
standable, even winsome, when the therapist learns of her immigrant
parents and her desperate struggle to transcend the degradation of her
slum childhood. Knowing another's process of becoming is often an in-
dispensable adjunct to knowing the person. What is important in this
regard is the accent. The past is explored in order to facilitate and deep-
en the present relationship. This is precisely the reverse of Freud's for-
mula, where the present relationship serves as a means to deepen un-
derstanding of the past. Charles Rycroft states this exceptionally
clearly:
       It makes better sense to say that the analyst makes excursions into his-
       torical research in order to understand something which is interfering
       with his present communication with the patient (in the same way that a
       translator might turn to history to elucidate an obscure text) than to say
       that he makes contact with the patient in order to gain access to bio-
       graphical data." 120
350


PART III
Isolation


                   CHAPTER 8
           Existential Isolation
kE        PROCESS of deepest inquiry-a process that Heidegger refers
to as "unconcealment," 1 -leads us to recognize that we are finite, that
we must die, that we are free, and that we cannot escape our freedom.
We also learn that the individual is inexorably alone.
   As freedom and death are concepts that traditionally lie outside of
the psychotherapist's domain, in early chapters I felt it necessary to
elaborate on their specific relevance to psychotherapy. The situation is
different with isolation since it is a familiar concept and arises fre-
quently in everyday therapy. In fact, isolation is so familiar and used in
so many different fashions that my first task must be to define it in an
existential context. The clinician, it seems to me, encounters three dif-
ferent types of isolation: interpersonal, intrapersonal and existential.
   Interpersonal isolation, generally experienced as loneliness, refers to
isolation from other individuals. It is a function of many factors: geo-
graphic isolation, the lack of appropriate social skills, heavily conflict-
ed feelings about intimacy, or a personality style (such as schizoid, nar-
cissistic, exploitative, or judgmental) that precludes gratifying social
interaction. Cultural factors play an important role in interpersonal iso-
lation. The decline of intimacy-sponsoring institutions-the extended
family, the stable residential neighborhood, the church, local mer-
chants, the family doctor-has, in the United States at least, inexorably
led to increased interpersonal estrangement.
                                                                       353


                                                   III I ISOLATION
   Intrapersonal isolation is a process whereby one partitions off parts of
oneself. Freud used the term "isolation" to describe a defense mecha-
nism, especially apparent in obsessional neurosis, in which an unpleas-
ant experience is stripped of its affect, and its associative connections
are interrupted, so that it is isolated from ordinary processes of
thought. 2 Harry Stack Sullivan was particularly interested in the phe-
nomenon by which one excludes experience from conscious awareness
and/ or makes parts of the psyche inaccessible to the self. He referred to
this process as "dissociation" (abandoning the term "repression") and
elevated it to a central position in his schema of psychopathology. 3 In
the contemporary psychotherapy scene "isolation" is used not only to
refer to formal defense mechanisms but in a more casual way to con-
note any form of fragmentation of the self. Thus, intrapersonal isola-
tion results whenever one stifles one's own feelings or desires, accepts
"oughts" or "shoulds" as one's own wishes, distrusts one's own judge-
ment, or buries one's own potential.
   Intrapersonal isolation is a widely used and current paradigm of psy-
chopathology. Modern theorists such as Horney, Fromm, Sullivan,
Maslow, Rogers, and May all posit that pathology is the result of ob-
structions that, occuring early in life, act to derail the individual's natu-
ral development. Carl Rogers in a discussion of Ludwig Binswanger's
famous case of Ellen West clearly describes intrapersonal isolation:
"Though as a child she was wholly independent of opinion of others,
she now is completely dependent on what others think. She no longer
has any way of knowing what she feels or what her opinion is. This is
the loneliest state of all, an almost complete separation from one's
autonomous organism."•
   Contemporary therapists focus closely on the goal of helping pa-
tients reintegrate previously split-off parts of themselves. In a research
project that I described in chapter 6, successful patients were asked to
rank-order sixty factors in therapy according to degree cf helpfulness. 5
The single most frequently chosen item by far was "discovering and ac-
cepting previously unknown or unacceptable parts of myself." To
make oneself whole again is the goal of most psychotherapies (exclud-
ing symptom-oriented ones). Peds, for example, christened his ap-
proach "Gestalt" therapy to emphasize his dedication to the aim of
"wholeness." (Note in this regard the common etymological root of
"whole," "heal," "healthy," "hale.")
   In the remainder of this chapter I shall focus on a third form of isola-
tion-existential isolation. This is not to say that interpersonal and in-
trapersonal isolation are not crucial issues in clinical work; but if I am
354


8 I Existential Isolation
to keep this treatise within manageable length, I must be content to
recommend to the reader the relevant literature. 6 There will be many
occasions, however, when I shall refer to interpersonal and intraper-
sonal isolation, for they are closely related to existential isolation (in-
terpersonal and existential isolation especially share a common bound-
ary). The types of isolation are similar subjectively; that is, they may
feel the same as and masquerade for one another. Frequently therapists
mistake them and treat a patient for the wrong type of isolation. Fur-
thermore, their boundaries are semipermeable: existential isolation, for
example, is often kept within manageable bounds through interper-
sonal affiliation. All these issues will be discussed in due time, but first
existential isolation must be defined.
                     What Is Existential Isolation?
Individuals are often isolated from others and from parts of them-
selves, but underlying these splits is an even more basic isolation that
belongs to existence-an isolation that persists despite the most grati-
fying engagement with other individuals and despite consummate
self-knowledge and integration. Existential isolation refers to an un-
bridgeable gulf between oneself and any other being. It refers, too, to
an isolation even more fundamental-a separation between the indi-
vidual and the world. "Separation from the world" -that seems to be
the right phrase, yet still it is vague. One of my patients provided an
embodied definition. She experienced periodic panic attacks that oc-
curred whenever her relationship with a dominant other was endan-
gered. When describing her experience, she said to me: "Remember the
movie West Side Story, when the two lovers meet, and suddenly every-
thing else in the world mystically fades away, and they are absolutely
alone with one another? Well, that's what happens to me at these
times. Except there's no one else there but me."
   Another patient had a recurrent nightmare that dated back to early
childhood and now, in adulthood, resulted in severe insomnia-in
fact, in a sleep phobia, since he was terrified of going to sleep. The
nightmare is unusual in that the dreamer himself suffered no harm. In-
stead, his world melted away, exposing him to nothingness. The
dream:
                                                                        355


                                                      III I ISOLATION
       I am awake in my room. Suddenly I begin to notice that everything is
       changing. The window frame seems stretched and then wavy, the book-
       cases squashed, the doorknob disappears, and a hole appears in the door
       which gets larger and larger. Everything loses its shape and begins to
       melt. There's nothing there any more and I begin to scream.
   Thomas Wolfe was forever haunted by his unusually acute aware-
ness of existential isolation. In the autobiographical Look Homeward,
Angel the protagonist muses on isolation even while an infant in the
crib:
       Unfathomable loneliness and sadness crept through him: he saw his life
       down the solemn vista of a forest aisle, and he knew he would always be
       the sad one: caged in that little round of skull, imprisoned in that beat-
       ing and most secret heart his life must always walk down lonely pas-
       sages. Lost. He understood that men were forever strangers to one an-
       other, that no one ever comes really to know anyone, that imprisoned in
       the dark womb of our mother, we come to life without having seen her
       face, that we are given to her arms a stranger, and that, caught in that in-
       soluble prison of being, we escape it never, no matter what arms may
       clasp us, what mouth may kiss us, what heart may warm us. Never, nev-
       er, never, never, never. 7
   Existential isolation is a vale of loneliness which has many ap-
proaches. A confrontation with death and with freedom will inevitably
lead the individual into that vale.
DEATH AND EXISTENTIAL ISOLATION
  It is the knowledge of "my death" that makes one fully realize that
no one can die with one or for one. Heidegger states that "though one
can go to his death for another, such 'dying-for' can never signify that
the other has had his death taken away in even the slightest degree. No
one can take the other's death away from him." 8 Though we may be sur-
rounded with friends, though others may die for the same cause, even
though others may die at the same time (as in the ancient Egyptian
practice of killing and burying servants with the pharoah, or in suicide
pacts), still at the most fundamental level dying is the most lonely hu-
man experience.
   Everyman, the best-known medieval morality play, portrays in a
powerful and simple manner the loneliness of the human encounter
with death. 9 Everyman is visited by Death who informs him that he
must take his final pilgrimage to God. Everyman pleads for mercy, but
to no avail. Death informs him that he must make himself ready for the
day that "no man living may escape away." In despair Everyman hur-
356


8 I Existential Isolation
riedly casts about for help. Frightened and, above all, isolated, he
pleads to others to accompany him on his journey. The character Kin-
dred refuses to go with him:
       Ye be a merry man:
       Take good heart to you and make no moan
       But one thing I warn you, by Saint Anne,
       As for me, ye shall go alone.
   As does Everyman's cousin, who pleads that she is indisposed:
       No, by our Lady! I have the cramp in my toe
       Trust not to me. For so God me speed,
       I will deceive you in your most need.
   He is forsaken in the same way by each of the other allegorical char-
acters in the play: Fellowship, Worldly Goods, and Knowledge. Even
his attributes desert him:
       Beauty, strength and discretion.
       When death bloweth his blast
       They all run from me full fast.
   Everyman is finally saved from the full terror of existential isolation
because one figure, Good Deeds, is willing to go with him even unto
death. And, indeed, that is the Christian moral of the play: good works
within the context of religion provide a buttress against ultimate isola-
tion. Today's secular Everyman who cannot or does not embrace reli-
gious faith must indeed take the journey alone.
FREEDOM AND EXISTENTIAL ISOLATION
   The Loneliness of Being One's Own Parent. To the extent that one is re-
sponsible for one's life, one is alone. Responsibility implies authorship;
to be aware of one's authorship means to foresake the belief that there
is another who creates and guards one. Deep loneliness is inherent in
the act of self-creation. One becomes aware of the universe's cosmic in-
difference. Perhaps animals have some sense of shepherd and shelter,
but humankind, cursed by self-awareness, must remain exposed to
existence.
   Erich Fromm believed that isolation is the primary source of anxiety.
He especially emphasized the sense of helplessness inherent in the hu-
man being's basic separateness.
         The awareness of his aloneness and separateness, of his helplessness
       before the forces of nature and of society, all this makes his separate dis-
                                                                              357


                                                      III I ISOLATION
       united existence an unbearable prison. The experience of separateness
       arouses anxiety; it is indeed the source of all anxiety. Being separate
       means being cut off, without any capacity to use my human powers.
       Hence to be separate means to be helpless, unable to grasp the world-
       things and people-actively; it means that the world can invade me
       without my ability to react. 10
This fused affect of loneliness-helplessness is an understandable emo-
tional response to our finding ourselves inserted, without our consent,
into an existence not of our choosing. Heidegger uses the term
"thrownness" to refer to this state. Though one creates oneself, one's
project-what one ultimately fashions for oneself- is limited by one's
having been thrown alone onto the easel of existence.
   Defamiliarization. Not only do we constitute ourselves but we consti-
tute a world fashioned in such a way as to conceal that we have consti-
tuted it. Existential isolation impregnates the "paste of things," the
bedrock of the world. But it is so hidden by layer upon layer of worldly
artifacts, each imbued with personal and collective meaning, that we
experience only a world of everydayness, of routine activities, of the
"they." We are surrounded, "at home in," a stable world of familiar ob-
jects and institutions, a world in which all objects and beings are con-
nected and interconnected many times over. We are lulled into a sense
of cozy, familiar belongingness; the primordial world of vast emptiness
and isolation is buried and silenced, only to speak in brief bursts dur-
ing nightmares and mythic visions.
   Yet there are moments when the curtain of reality momentarily flut-
ters open, and we catch a glimpse of the machinery backstage. In these
moments, which I believe every self-reflective individual experiences,
an instantaneous defamiliarization occurs when meanings are
wrenched from objects, symbols disintegrate, and one is torn from
one's moorings of "at-homeness." Albert Camus, in an early work, de-
scribed such a moment when he was in a hotel room in an alien
country.
          Here I am defenseless in a city where I cannot read the signs ... with-
       out friends to speak to, in short, without diversion. In this room pene-
       trated by the sounds of a strange city, I know that nothing will draw me
       toward the more delicate light of a home or another cherished place. Am
       I going to call out? cry out? Strange faces would appear.... And now the
       curtain of habit, the comfortable tissue of gestures and words, wherein
       the heart grows sluggish, rises slowly and finally unveils the pale face of
       anxiety. Man is face to face with himself: I defy him to be happy ...."
   In these moments of deep existential anguish one's relationship to
the world is profoundly shaken. One of my patients, a highly success-
358


 8 I Existential Isolation
ful, hard-driving executive, described such an incident: it lasted only a
few minutes, yet was so powerful that it retained its vividness forty
years later. At the age of twelve he was sleeping outside, looking at the
sky, and suddenly felt himself separated from mother earth and drift-
ing between the stars. Where was he? Where did he come from? Where
did God come from? Where did something (rather than nothing) come
from? He felt overcome with aloneness, with helplessness, and with
groundlessness. Though I find it hard to believe that lifelong decisions
are made in an instant, he insists that then and there he decided he
would make himself so renowned and mighty that he would never
again have this feeling.
  Of course, this empty, lost, disenfranchising experience is not "out
there": it is within us, and no external stimulus is necessary to find it.
All that is required is an earnest, inward search. Robert Frost phrases it
beautifully:
       They cannot scare me with their empty spaces
       Between stars-on stars where no human race is.
       I have it in me so much nearer home
       To scare myself with my own desert places. 12
  When one falls into one's own "desert places," the world is suddenly
unfamiliar. At these times Kurt Reinhardt says:
          Something utterly mysterious intervenes between him and the famil-
       iar objects of his world, between him and his fellowmen, between him
       and all his "values." Everything which he had called his own pales and
       sinks away, so that there is nothing left to which he might cling. What
       threatens is "nothing" (no thing), and he finds himself alone and lost in
       the void. But when this dark and terrible night of anguish has passed,
       man breathes a sigh of relief and tells himself: it was "nothing," after all.
       He has experienced "nothingness." 13
  Heidegger uses the term "uncanny" ("not at home") to refer to the
state in which one loses one's sense of familiarity in the world. When
one (dasein) is totally involved in the familiar world of appearance and
has lost contact with one's existential situation, Heidegger considers
one to be in the "everyday," "fallen" mode. Anxiety serves as a guide
to lead one back, by way of uncanniness to awareness of isolation and
nothingness:
          As dasein falls, anxiety brings it back from its absorption in the
       "world." Everyday familiarity collapses.... "Being-in" enters into the
       existential "mode" of the "not-at-home." Nothing else is meant by our
       talk of "uncanniness." 14
                                                                               359


                                                                III I ISOLATION
   In another passage Heidegger states that when one is brought back
from "absorption in the world" and objects are divested of their mean-
ing, one experiences anxiety at confronting the world's loneliness,
mercilessness, and nothingness ... Thus, to escape uncanniness we use
the world like a tool and absorb ourselves in the diversions provided
by Maya-the world of appearances. The ultimate dread occurs when
we confront nothing. In the face of nothing, no thing and no being can
help us; it is at that moment when we experience existential isolation
in its fullness. Both Kierkegaard and Heidegger were fond of word
play involving "nothing." "Of what is man afraid?" "Of nothing!"
   The Italian film maker, Antonioni was a master at portraying defami-
liarization. In many of his films (for example, The Eclipse) objects are
seen in stark clarity, with a kind of cold mysteriousness. They are de-
tached from their meaning, and the main character simply drifts past
them unable to act, while everyone around her goes on busily using
them. 16
   Defamiliarization involves more than objects in the world; other en-
tities invented to provide structure and stability-such as roles, values,
guidelines, rules, ethics-can similarly be stripped of meaning. In
chapter 5 I described a simple "disidentification" exercise in which in-
dividuals list answers to the question "Who am I?" on cards and then
meditate upon the experience of giving up, one by one, each of these
roles (for example, a man, a father, a son, a dentist, a walker, a reader of
books, a husband, a Catholic, or Bob). By the time the exercise is com-
pleted, the individual has divested himself or herself of all roles and
becomes aware that being is independent of accouterments, that one
persists, as Nietzche said, even after the "last cloudy streak of evaporat-
ing reality.'' 17 Some of the fantasies reported by subjects at the end of
the exercise (such as "a disembodied spirit gliding in a void") suggest
clearly that role divestment propels one into an experience of existen-
tial isolation.
   • Heidegger referrs to objects in the world as "ready-to-hand" or "present-at-hand,"
depending upon whether the object is considered "equipment" or is grasped in pure
essence:
     The threatening does not come from what is ready-to-hand or present-at-hand, but
     rather from the fact that neither of these "says" anything any longer. The world in which
     I exist has sunk into insignificance. Anxiety is anxious in the face of the "nothing"
     of the world; but this does not mean that in anxiety we experience something like
     the absence of what is present-at-hand within-the-world. The present-at-hand must
     be encountered in just such a way that it does not have any involvement whatsoever,
     but can show itself in an empty mercilessness. This implies, however, that our con-
     cernful awaiting finds nothing in terms of which it might be able to understand it-
     self; it clutches at the "nothing" of the world."
360


8 I Existential Isolation
   Experiences where one is alone, and everyday guidelines are sud-
denly stripped away, have the power to evoke a sense of the uncan-
ny-of not being at home in the world. The hiker who loses his or her
way, the skier who suddenly finds himself or herself off the trail, the
driver who in a dense fog can no longer see the road-the individual
in these situations often experiences a rush of dread, a dread indepen-
dent of the physical threat involved, a lonely dread that is a wind
blowing from one's own desert place-the nothing that is at the core of
being.
   Uncanny are the social explosions that suddenly uproot the values,
ethics, and morals that we have come to believe exist independently of
ourselves. The Holocaust, mob violence, the Jonestown mass suicide,
the chaos of war, all of these strike horror in us because they are evil,
but they also stun us because they inform us that nothing is as we have
always thought it to be, that contingency reigns, that everything could
be otherwise than it is; that everything we consider fixed, precious,
good can suddenly vanish; that there is no solid ground; that we are
"not-at-home" here or there or anywhere in the world.
GROWTH AND EXISTENTIAL ISOLATION
                                                          =
  The word "exist" implies differentiation ("ex-ist" "to stand out").
The process of growth, as Rank knew, is a process of separation, of be-
coming a separate being. The words of growth imply separateness:
autonomy (self-governing), self-reliance, standing on one's own feet,
individuation, being one's own person, independence. Human life be-
gins with a fusion of ova and sperm, passes through an embryonic
stage of complete physical dependence on the mother, into a phase of
physical and emotional dependency on surrounding adults. Gradually
the individual establishes boundaries demarking where he or she ends
and others begin, and becomes self-reliant, independent, and separate.
Not to separate means not to grow up, but the toll of separating and
growing up is isolation.
  The tension inherent in this dilemma is, in Kaiser's term, the human
being's "universal conflict." "Becoming an individual entails a com-
plete, a fundamental, an eternal and insurmountable isolation." 18
Fromm makes the same point in Escape from Freedom:
      To the extent to which the child emerges from that world it becomes
      aware of being alone, of being an entity separate from all others. This
      separation from a world, which in comparison with one's own individu-
      al existence is overwhelmingly strong and powerful, and often threaten-
      ing and dangerous, creates a feeling of powerlessness and anxiety. As
      long as one was an integral part of that world, unaware of the possibili-
                                                                          361


                                                     III I ISOLATION
       ties and responsibilities of individual action, one did not need to be
       afraid of it. When one has become an individual, one stands alone and
       faces the world in all its perilous and overpowering aspects.'"
   To relinquish a state of interpersonal fusion means to encounter exis-
tential isolation with all its dread and powerlessness. The dilemma of
fusion-isolation-or, as it is commonly referred to, attachment-separa-
tion-is the major existential developmental task. This is what Otto
Rank meant when he emphasized the importance of birth trauma. To
Rank, birth was symbolic of all emergence from embeddedness. What
the child fears is life itsel£. 20
   It becomes clear now that existential isolation and interpersonal iso-
lation are intricately interwoven. Emergence from interpersonal fusion
thrusts the individual into existential isolation. A dissatisfying state of
fusion-existence or too early or too tentative emergence leaves the indi-
vidual unprepared to face the isolation inherent in autonomous exis-
tence. The fear of existential isolation is the driving force behind many
interpersonal relationships and is, as we shall see, a major dynamic be-
hind the phenomenon of transference.
   The problem of relationship is a problem of fusion-isolation. On the
one hand, one must learn to relate to another without giving way to
the desire to slip out of isolation by becoming part of that other. But
one must also learn to relate to another without reducing the other to a
tool, a defense against isolation. Bugental (in his discussion of the
problems of relatedness) plays on the word "apart." 21 The human be-
ing's basic interpersonal task is to be at once "a-part-of' and "a-part-
from." Interpersonal and existential isolation are way stations for each
other. One must first separate oneself from the other in order to en-
counter isolation; one must be alone to experience aloneness. But, as I
shall now discuss, it is the facing of aloneness that ultimately allows
one to engage another deeply and meaningfully.
                        Isolation and Relationship
The experience of existential isolation produces a highly uncomfort-
able subjective state and, as is the case with any form of dysphoria, is
not tolerated by the individual for long. Unconscious defenses "work"
on it and quickly bury it-out of the purview of conscious experience.
The defenses must work without respite because the isolation is within
362


8 I Existential Isolation
one, always waiting to be recognized. "The waves of the ether," as
Martin Buber says, "roar on always, but for most of the time we have
turned off our receivers." 22
   How does one shield oneself from the dread of ultimate isolation?
One may take a portion of the isolation into oneself and bear it coura-
geously or, to use Heidegger's term, "resolutely." As for the rest, one
attempts to give up singleness and to enter into relationship with an-
other, with either a being like oneself or a divine being. The major but-
tress against the terror of existential isolation is thus relational in na-
ture, and my discussion of the clinical manifestations of existential
isolation must perforce center on interpersonal relationships. In accent,
however, I shall differ from traditional discussions of interpersonal
psychology: I shall focus not on such needs as security, attachment,
self-validation, satisfaction of lust, or power, but instead shall view re-
lationships according to how they assuage fundamental and universal
isolation.
   No relationship can eliminate isolation. Each of us is alone in exis-
tence. Yet aloneness can be shared in such a way that love compensates
for the pain of isolation. "A great relationship,'' says Buber, "breaches
the barriers of a lofty solitude, subdues its strict law, and throws a
bridge from self-being to self-being across the abyss of dread of the
universe." 23
   I believe that if we are able to acknowledge our isolated situations in
existence and to confront them with resoluteness, we will be able to
turn lovingly toward others. If, on the other hand, we are overcome
with dread before the abyss of loneliness, we will not reach out toward
others but instead will flail at them in order not to drown in the sea of
existence. In this instance our relationships will not be true relation-
ships at all but out of joint, miscarriages, distortions of what might
have been. We will not relate to others with a full sense of them as like
ourselves, as sentient beings, also alone, also frightened, also carving
out a world of at-homeness from the paste of things. We behave toward
other beings as toward tools or equipment. The other, now no longer
an "other" but an "it," is placed there, within one's circle of world, for
a function. The fundamental function, of course, is isolation denial, but
awareness of this function is too close to the lurking terror. Greater
concealment is needed; metafunctions emerge; and we constitute rela-
tionships that provide a product (for example, power, fusion, protec-
tion, greatness, or adoration) that in turn serves to deny isolation.
   There is nothing novel in this psychic defensive organization: every
explanatory system of behavior posits some core conflict that is en-
crusted with layers of protective and concealing dynamisms. These
                                                                        363


                                                   III I ISOLATION
 miscarried "relationships," with their products, their functions, and
 their metafunctions, constitute what clinicians refer to as "interperson-
 al psychopathology." I shall describe the clinical picture of many forms
.of pathological relationship and discuss the existential dynamics of
 each. But in order to understand fully what relationship is not, it is
 necessary first to apprehend what, in the best of ways, a relationship
 can be.
NEED-FREE LOVE
    A relationship, at its best, involves individuals who relate to one an-
 other in a need-free fashion. Yet how is it possible to love another for
 the other and not for what that other provides for the lover? How can
 we love without using, without a quid pro quo, without a mainsail of in-
 fatuation, lust, admiration, or self-service? Many wise thinkers have
 addressed this question, and I shall begin by reviewing their
 contributions.
    Martin Buber. "In the beginning is the relation." 2• Thus proclaimed
 Martin Buber, a philosopher and theologian, whose patriarchal appear-
 ance, complete to piercing gaze and full white beard, augmented the
 power of his philosophical pronouncements. Buber has had an extraor-
 dinary impact on both religious philosophy and modern psychiatric
 theory. His posture is an unusual one, straddling Jewish mystical
 thought and hasidism on the one hand and modern relational theory
 on the other. His proclamation "In the beginning is the relation" is
 rooted in these traditions. Buber was part of a mystical tradition that
 believes that every individual is part of the Covenant; each contains a
 divine spark that in concert reveal the holy presence. Thus every indi-
vidual is united in that each has a cosmic, spiritual association to the
 universe.
    Buber believed that longing for relationship was "innate" and given,
 "and that in his mother's womb everyman knows [that is, is related to]
 the universe and forgets it at birth." The child has a "drive" for con-
 tact-originally tactile, and then "optimal," contact with another be-
 ing.25 The child knows of no "I"; he knows of no other state of being
 than relation.
    "Man," Buber stated, does not exist as a separate entity: "Man is a
 creature of the between." 26 There are two basic types of relationships-
 thus, two types of in-betweenness-which Buber characterized "1-
 Thou" (sometimes translated as "1-You") and "l-It." The "l-It" relation-
 ship is the relationship between a person and equipment, a "function-
 al" relationship, a relationship between subject and object wholly
  lacking mutuality.
364


8 I Existential Isolation
   The 1-Thou relationship is a wholly mutual relationship involving a
full experiencing of the other. It differs from empathy (imaginatively
viewing a situation from the other's perspective) because it is more
than an "I" attempting to relate to an "other." "There is no 'I' as such,
but only the basic word I-Thou." 27
   "Relation is reciprocity." 28 Not only is the "Thou" of the I-Thou rela-
tionship different from the "If' in the l-It relationship, and not only
are the natures of the 1- Thou and the l-It relationships vastly different,
but there is even a more fundamental difference. The very "I" is different
in the two situations. It is not the "I" that has pre-eminent reality-an "I"
that can decide to relate to "Its" or "Thous" that are objects floating
into one's field of vision. No, the "I" is "betweenness"; the "I" appears
and is shaped in the context of some relationship. Thus the "I" is pro-
foundly influenced by the relationship with the "Thou." With each
"Thou," and with each moment of relationship, the "I" is created anew.
When relating to "It" (whether to a thing or to a person made into a
thing) one holds back something of oneself: one inspects it from many
possible perspectives; one categorizes it, analyzes it, judges it, and de-
cides upon its position in the grand scheme of things. But when one re-
lates to a "Thou," one's whole being is involved; nothing can be
withheld.
       The basic word 1-You can be spoken only with one's whole being. The
       concentration and fusion into a whole being can never be accomplished
       by me, can never be accomplished without me. I require a You to be-
       come; becoming I, I say You .... 29
If one relates to another with less than one's whole being, if one holds
something back by, for example, relating through greed or anticipation
of some return, or if one remains in the objective attitude, a spectator,
and wonders about the impression one's actions will make on the oth-
er, then one has transferred an 1-Thou encounter into an l-It one.
   If one is to relate truly to another, one must truly listen to the other:
relinquish stereotypes and anticipations of the other, and allow oneself
to be shaped by the other's response. Buber's distinction between
"genuine" and "pseudo" listening obviously has important implica-
tions for the therapeutic relationship.
   To relate to another in a need-less fashion, one must lose or tran-
scend oneself. My favorite illustration of an 1-Thou relationship is
Buber's description of himself and his horse when he was a youth:
         When I was eleven years of age, spending the summer on my grand-
       parents' estate, I used, as often as I could do it unobserved, to steal into
                                                                               365


                                                       III I ISOLATION
      the stable and gently stroke the neck of my darling, a broad dapple-gray
      horse. It was not a casual delight but a great, certainly friendly, but also
      deeply stirring happening. If I am to explain it now, beginning from the
      still very fresh memory of my hand, I must say that what I experienced
      in touch with the animal was the Other, the immense otherness of the
      Other, which, however, did not remain strange like the otherness of the
      ox and the ram, but rather let me draw near and touch it. When I stroked
      the mighty mane, sometimes marvellously smooth-combed, at other
      times just as astonishingly wild, and felt the life beneath my hand, it was
      as though the element of vitality itself bordered on my skin, something
      that was not I, was certainly not akin to me, palpably the other, not just
      another, really the Other itself; and yet it let me approach, confided it-
      self to me, placed itself elementally in the relation of Thou and Thou
      with me. The horse, even when I had not begun by pouring oats for him
      into the manger, very gently raised his massive head, ears flicking, then
      snorted quietly, as a conspirator gives a signal meant to be recognizable
      only by his fellow-conspirator; and I was approved. But one time-1 do
       not know what came over the child, at any rate it was childlike
       enough-it struck me about the stroking, what fun it gave me, and sud-
      denly I became conscious of my hand. The game went on as before, but
      something had changed, it was no longer the same thing. And the next
      day, after giving him a rich feed, when I stroked my friend's head he did
       not raise his head. 30
  The basic experiential mode of the 1-Thou is "dialogue," in which, ei-
ther silently or spoken, "each of the participants has in mind the other
or others in their particular being and turns to them with the intention
of establishing a living mutual relation between himself and them." 31
Dialogue is simply the turning toward another with one's whole being.
When the young Buber turned away from the horse, became aware of
his hand, and of how much pleasure the stroking afforded him, then
dialogue vanished, and "monologue" and the l-It reigned. Buber
termed this turning away from the other "reflexion." In reflexion not
only is one "concerned with himself," 32 but, even more important, one
forgets about the particular being of the other.
  Viktor Frankl makes a similar point when he deplores the present-
day "vulgarization" of the concept of encounter. 33 Frankl argues, and
quite correctly I believe, that "encounter" as it often occurs in the basic
encounter group is no encounter at all but instead a self-expression, an
adoration of affect-discharge whose rationale is rooted in a psychologi-
cal "monadology" which pictures the human being as a windowless
celL a creature who cannot transcend oneself, who cannot "turn
toward the other." Consequently there is, too often, an emphasis on
getting one's aggression out, on beating a pillow or a punching bag, on
self-esteem, on using others to solve ancient problems, on self-actual-
366


8 I Existential Isolation
ization. Instead of turning toward the other, there is, as Buber would
say, sequential "monologues disguised as dialogue.'' 3'
   Buber asked for a great deal in an 1- Thou relationship. Once, for ex-
ample, he was visited by an unknown young man who ostensibly had
come for a chat. Buber found out much later that the stranger had a
hidden agenda, that he was "borne by destiny" and was on the verge
of a momentous personal decision. Though Buber treated him in a
friendly, considerate fashion, he berated himself for "not being there
in spirit" and for "omitting to guess the questions the man did not
put." 35 But is it possible always to turn toward the other with such in-
tensity? Obviously not, and Buber stressed that, though the 1- Thou,
constituted an ideal toward which one should strive, nonetheless it ex-
isted in only rare moments. One has to live primarily in the l-It world;
to live solely in the "Thou" world would result in one's burning one-
self up in the white flame of the "Thou."
       [The It-world is] the world in which one has to live and also can live
       comfortably .... The Thou-moments appear as queer lyric-dramatic epi-
       sodes. Their spell may be seductive, but they pull us dangerously to ex-
       tremes .... One cannot live in the pure present [that is, in the I-Thou] it
       would consume us ... and in all the seriousness of truth, listen: [that is,
       be in the 1-Thou] without it a human being cannot live. But whoever
       lives only with that is not human. 36
This plea for balance is reminiscent of Rabbi Hillel's well-known apho-
rism: "If I am not for myself, who will be? And if I am only for myself,
what am 1?" 37
   I have cited Buber extensively because his formulation of a need-less
love relationship is vivid and gripping. I cannot leave him without
commenting upon an obvious tension between the fundamental posi-
tion I have accorded to existential isolation and Buber's assertion that
the human being does not exist as an "I" but is instead a "creature of
the in-between." Since Buber held that the human being's basic mode
of existence is relational, he would accord no place in his system for ex-
istential isolation. He would protest at my positing that isolation is a
fundamental aspect of our existential situation; and even more vigor-
ously would he protest at my citing his work as part of my discussion.
   Yet let me look at an important dream with which Buber began Be-
tween Man and Man-a recurrent dream which visited him, sometimes
after an interval of several years, all his life. 38 The dream, which Buber
called "the dream of the double cry," begins with his finding himself
alone "in a vast cave, or a mud building, or on the fringes of a gigantic
forest whose like I cannot remember having seen." Then something ex-
                                                                             367


                                                      III I ISOLATION
traordinary occurs, like, for example, an animal tearing the flesh from
his arm, and then:
       I cry out. ... Each time it is the same cry, inarticulate but in strict
       rhythm, rising and falling, swelling to a fullness which my throat could
       not endure were I awake, long and slow quite slow and very long, a cry
       that is a song. When it ends my heart stops beating. But then, some-
       where, far away, another cry mourns toward me, another which is the
       same, the same cry uttered or sung by another voice.
The responding cry is the critical event for Buber:
       As the reply ends, a certitude, true dream certitude comes to me that now
       it has happened. Nothing more. Just this, and in this way-now it has
       happened. If I should try to explain it, it means that that happening
       which gave rise to my cry has only now, with the rejoinder, really and
       undoubtably happened.
   Buber held that our basic mode of existence is relational; and in this
dream, which he cited as a truth-giving vision, existence begins with
the appearance of the relationship-the responding cry. Yet the dream
text can, with grace, be interpreted differently. One begins, not in rela-
tionship, but ahme and in an uncanny place. One is attacked and
frightened. One cries out and, in anticipation of a reply, one's heart
stops beating. The dream speaks to me of fundamental isolation and
suggests that our existence begins with a solitary, lonely cry, anxiously
awaiting a response.
   Abraham Maslow. Abraham Maslow, who died in 1970, has had im-
mense influence on modern psychological theory. More than any other
person, he must be regarded as the progenitor of humanistic psycholo-
gy-a field that, as I discussed in the initial chapter, overlaps existen-
tial psychology at many points. Maslow is destined, in my view, to be
rediscovered many times before the richness of his thought is fully
assimilated.
   One of Maslow's fundamental propositions was that an individual's
basic motivation is oriented toward either "deficit" or "growth." Psy-
choneurosis, he thought, is a deficiency disease resulting from a lack of
fulfillment, beginning early in life, of certain basic psychological
"needs" -that is, safety, belongingness, identification, love, respect,
prestige. 39 Individuals who have these needs satisfied are growth-
oriented: they are able to realize their own innate potential for maturi-
ty and self-actualization. Growth-oriented individuals, in contrast to
those with a deficiency orientation, are far more self-sufficient and far
368


8 I Existential Isolation
less dependent upon their environment for reinforcement or gratifica-
tion. In other words, the determinants that govern them are not social
or environmental but inner:
       The laws of their own inner nature, their potentialities and capacities,
       their talents, their latent resources, their creative impulses, their needs
       to know themselves and to become more and more integrated and uni-
       fied, more and more aware of what they really are, of what they really
       want, of what their call or vocation or fate is to be."••
   Growth-motivated and deficiency-motivated individuals have differ-
ent types of interpersonal relations. The growth-motivated person is
less dependent, less beholden to others, less needful of others' praise
and affection, less anxious for honors, prestige, and rewards. He or she
does not require continual interpersonal need gratification and, in fact,
may at times feel hampered by others and prefer periods of privacy.
Consequently the growth-motivated individual does not relate to oth-
ers as sources of supply but is able to view them as complex, unique,
whole beings. The deficiency-motivated individual, on the other hand,
relates to others from the point of view of usefulness. Those aspects of
the other that are not related to the perceiver's needs are either over-
looked altogether or regarded as an irritant or a threat. Thus, as Maslow
said, love is transformed into something else and resembles our rela-
tionships "with cows, horses, and sheep, as well as with waiters, taxi-
cab drivers, porters, policemen, or others whom we use."• 1
   Accordingly, Maslow described two types of love that are consonant
with these two types of motivation: "deficiency" and "growth." "0-
love" (deficiency love) is "selfish love" or "love-need," whereas "B-
love" (love for the being of another person) is "unneeding love" or
"unselfish love." B-love, he felt, is not possessive and is admiring rath-
er than needing; it is a richer, "higher," more valuable subjective expe-
rience than 0-love. 0-love can be gratified, whereas the concept of
"gratification" hardly applies at all to B-love. B-love has within it a
minimum of anxiety-hostility (but there can, of course, be anxiety-for-
the-other). B-lovers are more independent of each other, more autono-
mous, less jealous or threatened, less needful, more disinterested, but
also simultaneously more eager to help the other toward self-actualiza-
tion, more proud of the other's triumphs, more altruistic, generous, and
fostering. B-love, in a profound sense, creates the partner, provides
self-acceptance and a feeling of love-worthiness, which enhances con-
tinued growth!2
   Erich Fromm. In his jewel of a book, The Art of Loving/3 Erich Fromm
                                                                              369


                                                         III I ISOLATION
addressed the question with which Buber and Maslow struggled: What
is the nature of need-free love? Indeed it is striking, and reassuring,
that these three seminal thinkers, each deriving from different back-
grounds (theology-philosophy, experimental and social psychology,
and psychoanalysis) arrived at similar conclusions.
   Fromm's starting point is that the human being's most fundamental
concern is existential isolation, that the awareness of separateness is
"the source of all anxiety,"u and that our major psychological task,
throughout the ages, has been the overcoming of separateness. Fromm
discusses several historical attempts at solution: creative activity (the
union of artist with material and product), orgiastic states (religious,
sexual, drug-induced), and conformity with customs and beliefs of the
group. All of these attempts fall short:
       The unity in productive (creative) work is not interpersonal; the unity
       achieved in orgiastic fusion is transitory; the unity achieved by confor-
       mity is only pseudo-unity. Hence they are only partial answers to the
       problem of existence. The full answer lies in the achievement of interpersonal
       union, of fusion with another person, in love. 45
   What Fromm meant by "the full answer" is not clear, but I assume it
to be "the most satisfactory" answer. Love does not take away our sepa-
rateness-that is a given of existence and can be faced but never
erased. Love is our best mode of coping with the pain of separateness.
Buber, Maslow, and, as we shall see, Fromm arrived at similar formula-
tions of need-less love, but they started from different positions about
the schema of love in the individual's life. Buber assumed that a state of
love was the human being's natural state in existence, and that isola-
tion was a fallen state. Maslow regarded love both as one of the innate
human needs and potentials. Fromm considered love as a mode of cop-
ing, "an answer to the problem of existence" -a view close to my posi-
tion in this book.
   Not all forms of love answer equally well the anguish of separate-
ness. Fromm differentiated "symbiotic union" -a form of fallen love-
from "mature" love. Symbiotic love, consisting of an active (sadism)
and a passive (masochism) form, is a state of fusion where neither party
is whole or free (I shall discuss this among the forms of maladaptive
love in the following section). Mature love is "union under the condi-
 tion of preserving one's integrity, one's individuality.... In love the
paradox occurs that two beings become one and yet remain two." 46
    Fromm traces the individual development of love from early child-
 hood when one experiences being loved for what one is or, perhaps
370


 8 I Existential Isolation
more accurately, because one is. Later, between eight and ten, a new
factor enters the child's life: awareness that one produces love by one's
own activity. As the individual overcomes egocentricity, the needs of
the other become as important as his or her own; and gradually the in-
dividual transforms the concept of love from "being loved" into "lov-
ing." Fromm equates "being loved" with a state of dependency in
which by remaining small, helpless, or "good," one is rewarded by be-
ing loved; whereas "loving" is an effective potent state. "Infantile love
follows the principle 'I love because I am loved.' Mature love follows
the principle: 'I am loved because I love.' Immature love says, 'I love
you because I need you.' Mature love says, 'I need you because I love
you."'•7
    Fromm's point that love is an active, not a passive, process has extra-
ordinary importance for the clinician. Patients complain of loneliness,
of being unloved and unlovable, but the productive work is always to
be done in the opposite realm: their inability to love. Love is a positive
act, not a passive affect; it is giving, not receiving-a "standing in," not
a "falling for."• 8 A distinction must be made between "giving" and
"depleting." An individual with a hoarding, a receptive, or an exploita-
tive orientation .. will feel depleted or impoverished by giving; one
with a marketing orientation will feel cheated by giving and not re-
ceiving. But for the mature "productive" person, giving is an expres-
sion of strength and abundance. In the act of giving, one expresses and
enhances one's aliveness. "When one gives, he brings something to life
in the other person, and this which is brought to life reflects back to
him; in truly giving, he cannot help receiving that which is given back
 to him. Giving makes the other person a giver also, and they both share
in the joy of what they have brought to life." 50 Note how close this is to
Buber: "Relation is reciprocity. My Thou acts on me as I act on it. Our
students teach us, our works form us .... Inscrutably involved, we live
in the currents of universal reciprocity." 51
    In addition to giving, mature love implies other basic elements: con-
cern, responsivity, respect, and knowledge. 52 To love means to be ac-
 tively concerned for the life and the growth of another. One must be
responsive to the needs (physical and psychic) of the other. One must
   • Fromm describes five basic types of interpersonally based character structure: recep-
tive, exploitative, hoarding, marketing, and productive. The first four (the "nonproduc-
tive" types) believe that the "source of all good" is outside them, and that they must en-
deavor to get it by accepting, taking, preserving, or exchanging, respectively. The
productive type is motivated from within and is a growth-motivated, actualized
individ uat.••
                                                                                       371


                                                      III I ISOLATION
 respect the uniqueness of the other, to see him as he is, and to help him
 to grow and unfold in his own ways, for his own sake and not for the
purpose of serving oneself. But one cannot fully respect the other with-
out knowing that other deeply. True knowledge of the other, Fromm
 believes, is possible only when one transcends one's self-concern and
sees the other person in the other's own terms. One needs to listen and
to experience empathically (though Fromm does not use that word):
 that is, one needs to enter and become familiar with the private world
 of the other, to live in the other's life and sense the other's meanings
 and experiences. Note again how Fromm and Buber converge: compare
 Fromm's loving and Buber's "dialogue" and "genuine, presupposition-
 less, listening.''
    It is important to the clinician to think of love as "attitude" (some-
 thing characteristic of the lover's orientation to the world) rather than
 in terms of the lover's relationship to his or her love "object." Too of-
 ten we make the mistake of considering exclusive attachment to one
 person as proof of the intensity and purity of the love. But such a love
 is, in Fromm's terms, "symbiotic love" or "overinflated egotism" 53 and,
 in the absence of caring of others, is invariably destined to cave in on
 itself. Need-less love is instead an individual's mode of relating to the world.
    A forty-year-old highly successful executive once consulted me be-
 cause he had fallen in love with a woman and was in the throes of de-
 ciding whether to leave his wife and children. In therapy, after only a
 few sessions, he became impatient and highly critical of me for general
 inefficiency and for my failure to offer him a systematic well-planned
 course of action. Soon this criticism led us into his highly judgmental
 attitude toward people in general. In therapy we proceeded to investi-
 gate, not the immediate decision he faced, but his lack of love toward
his world at large. Therapy proved of benefit to him by focusing, as ef-
fective therapy generally does, on the unexpected.
    The most fundamental type of love, Fromm believes, is brotherly
love-an experience of union with all individuals which is character-
ized by its very lack of exclusivity. The Bible stresses that the object of
love should be the frail, the poor, the widow, the orphan, the stranger.
These do not serve a purpose, and to love them is to love in need-less,
"brotherly" fashion.
    I began this section with the question, How is it possible to relate to
another in a need-free fashion? Now, in the light of Buber, Maslow,
and Fromm's similar conclusions, I shall describe the characteristics of
a mature, need-free relationship and then use this prototype to illumi-
 nate by contrast the nature of various miscarried relationships.
372


8 I Existential Isolation
    1. To care for another means to relate in a selfless way: one lets go of self-
       consciousness and self-awareness; one relates without the overarching
       thought, What does he think of me? or, What's in it for me? One does
       not look for praise, adoration, sexual release, power, money. One relates
       in the moment solely to the other person: there must be no third party,
       actual or imagined, observing the encounter. In other words, one must
       relate with one's whole being: if part of oneself is elsewhere-for exam-
       ple, studying the effect that the relationship will have upon some third
       person-then to that extent one has failed to relate.
   2. To care for another individual means to know and to experience the oth-
       er as fully as possible. If one relates selflessly, one is free to experience
       all parts of the other rather than the part that serves some utilitarian pur-
       pose. One extends oneself into the other, recognizing the other as a sen-
       tient being who has also constituted a world about himself or herself.
   3. To care for another means to care about the being and the growth of the
       other. With one's full knowledge, gleaned from genuine listening, one
       endeavors to help the other become fully alive in the moment of
       encounter.
   4. Caring is active. Mature love is loving, not being loved. One gives lov-
       ingly to the other; one does not "fall for" the other.
   5. Caring is one's way of being in the world; it is not an exclusive, elusive
       magical connection with one particular person.
   6. Mature caring flows out of one's richness, not out of one's poverty-out
       of growth, not out of need. One does not love because one needs the oth-
       er to exist, to be whole, to escape overwhelming loneliness. One who
       loves maturely has met these needs at other times, in other ways, not the
       least of which was the maternal love which flowed toward one in the
       early phases of life. Past loving, then, is the source of strength; current
       loving is the result of strength.
   7. Caring is reciprocal. To the extent one truly "turns toward the other,"
       one is altered. To the extent one brings the other to life, one also be-
       comes more fully alive.
   8. Mature caring is not without its rewards. One is altered, one is enriched,
       one is fulfilled, one's existential loneliness is attenuated. Through caring
       one is cared for. Yet these rewards flow from genuine caring; they do
       not instigate it. To borrow Frankl's felicitous word play-the rewards en-
       sue but ·cannot be pursued.
    Existential Isolation and Interpersonal Psychopathology
If we fail to develop the inner strength, the sense of personal worth
and firm identity that enables us to face existential isolation, to say "so
be it," and to take anxiety into ourselves, then we will struggle in
                                                                                373


                                                  III I ISOLATION
oblique ways to find safety. In this section I shall examine these safety-
seeking methods and their clinical manifestations. For the most part
they are relational-that is, they involve interpersonal relationships-
but, as we shall see, in each instance the individual does not relate to
(that is, does not "care for") the other but instead uses the other for a
function. The terror, the direct awareness of existential isolation, and
the psychic defensive structure that we elaborate to assuage anxiety are
all unconscious. One knows only that one cannot be alone, that one
desperately wants from others something that one is never able to ob-
tain and that, try as one might, something always goes wrong with
one's relationships.
   Yet another solution lies in the direction of sacrificing selfhood: one
gains relief from isolation anxiety through immersion in some other
individual, cause, or pursuit. Thus, individuals are, as Kierkegaard said,
twice in despair: 5• to begin with, in a fundamental existential despair,
and then further in despair because, having sacrificed self-awareness,
they do not even know they are in despair.
EXISTING IN THE EYES OF OTHERS
   "The worst thing about being alone, the thought that drives me ba-
nanas, is that, at that moment, no one in the world may be thinking
about me." So declared a patient in a group session who had been hos-
pitalized because of panic attacks when alone. There was, among the
other patients in this inpatient therapy group, instantaneous agree-
ment with this experience. One nineteen-year-old, who had been hos-
pitalized for slashing her wrists following the break-up of a romantic
relationship, said simply, "I'd rather be dead than alone!" Another
said, "When I'm alone, that's when I hear voices. Maybe my voices are
a way not to be alone!" (an arresting phenomenological explanation of
hallucination). Another patient who, on several occasions, had mutilat-
ed herself stated that she had done so because of her despair about a
highly unsatisfying relationship with a man. Yet she could not leave
him because of her terror of being alone. When I asked her what terri-
fied her about loneliness, she said with stark, direct, psychotic insight,
"I don't exist when I'm alone."
   The same dynamic speaks in the child's incessant plea, "Watch me,"
"Look at me" -the presence of the other is required to make reality
real. (Here, as elsewhere, I cite the child's experience as anterior mani-
festation, not as cause, of an underlying conflict.) Lewis Carroll, in
Through the Looking Glass wonderfully expressed the stark belief, held
by many patients, that "I exist only so long as I am thought about." Al-
ice, Tweedledee, and Tweedledum come upon the Red King sleeping:
374


 8 I Existential Isolation
         "He's dreaming now," said Tweedledee, "and what do you think he's
      dreaming about?"
         Alice said, "Nobody can guess that."
         "Why, about you!" Tweedledee exclaimed, clapping his hands trium-
      phantly. "And if he left off dreaming about you, where do you suppose
      you'd be?"
         "Where I am now, of course," said Alice.
         "Not you!" Tweedledee retorted contemptuously. "You'd be nowhere.
      Why you're only a sort of thing in this dream!"
         "If that there King was to wake," added Tweedledum, "you'd go
      out-bang!- just like a candle!"
         "I shouldn't!" Alice exclaimed indignantly. "Besides, if I'm only a sort
      of thing in his dream, what are you, I should like to know?"
         "Ditto," said Tweedledum.
         "Ditto, ditto!" cried Tweedledee.
         He shouted this so loud that Alice couldn't help saying, "Hush! You'll
      be waking him, I'm afraid, if you make so much noise."
         "Well, it's no use your talking about waking him," said Tweedledum,
      "when you're only one of the things in his dream. You know very well
      you're not real."
         "I am real!" said Alice, and began to cry.
         "You won't make yourself a bit realer by crying," Tweedledee re-
      marked. "There's nothing to cry about."
         "If I wasn't real," Alice said-half laughing through her tears, it all
      seemed so ridiculous-"! shouldn't be able to cry."
         "I hope you don't suppose those are real tears?" Tweedledum inter-
      rupted in a tone of great contempt. 55
   One patient in a therapy group commented that once she had been
in therapy for several months, and years later chanced to meet her
therapist. She was "devastated" because the therapist took forty-five
seconds to remember who she was. She then turned toward the group
therapist and asked, "Will you always remember me? I can't go on if
you won't." She was a high school teacher and was able gradually to
accept the cruel fact that just as she would forget her students long be-
fore they forgot her, so it was with therapists. The therapist and the
teacher are more important to the patient and the student than the oth-
er way around. (Still, this does not preclude the fact that, as I shall dis-
cuss later, when the therapist is with the patient, it is a full, deep pres-
ence.) Later in the same session the patient commented that she was
beginning to understand why suicide had always appeared to be a
compelling option for her. She believed that if she committed suicide,
others would remember her for a very, very long time. This is an excel-
lent example of "suicide as a magical act," which I described in chapter
2. There is in her view of suicide no idea of death; on the contrary, she
                                                                             375


                                                 III I ISOLATION
clasped suicide as a way to defeat death-as one may do provided one
believes that one can continue to live if one exists in the consciousness
of another.
  By searching for love, the neurotic individual flees from the dimly
recognized sense of isolation and hollowness at the center of being. By
being chosen and valued one feels affirmed in one's being. The pure
sense of being, of "I AM," of being the source of things, is too f~ighten­
ing in its isolation; therefore, one denies self-creation and chooses to
believe that one exists insofar as one is the object of others' conscious-
ness. This solution is doomed to fail on several counts. The relationship
generally fails because the other in time wearies of affirming the exis-
tence of the individual. Furthermore, the other senses that he or she is
being not loved but needed. The other never feels wholly known and
wholly embraced because the individual relates only to a part-the
part that serves the function of affirming his or her existence. The solu-
tion fails because it is only stopgap: if one cannot affirm oneself, then
one continually needs affirmation by the other. One is distracted per-
manently from facing one's fundamental isolation. The solution fails
also because one misidentifies the problem: one considers it to be that
one is unloved, whereas in actuality it is that one is unable to love. As
we have seen, loving is more difficult than being loved and requires
greater awareness and acceptance of one's existential situation.
   The individual who needs the affirmation of others to feel alive must
avoid being alone. True solitude comes too close to the anxiety of exis-
tential isolation, and the neurotic individual avoids it at all costs; isolat-
ed space is peopled with others; isolated time is extinguished ("killed")
with busyness. (Solitary confinement has always been a particularly
grim punishment.) Others combat isolation by escaping from the pre-
sent, solitary moment: they comfort themselves with blissful memories
of the past (even though at the time their experiences may have been
far from blissful), or they project themselves into the future by enjoy-
ing the imagined spoils of as yet unrealized projects.
   The recent swell of interest in meditation stems in part from its nov-
elty and from a sense of mastery. It is rare indeed for the individual in
the Western world simply to be with himself or herself and to experi-
ence, rather than dispatch, time. We have been taught to do several
things at once-smoking, chewing, listening, driving, watching televi-
sion, reading. We value time-saving machines, and we apply these ma-
chine values to ourselves. What can we do, however, with the time that
we save except to find other ways to kill it?
  When one's primary motive in engaging others is to ward off loneli-
376


8 I Existential Isolation
ness, then one has transformed the other into equipment. Not infre-
quently two individuals will each serve each other's primary function
and, like socket and prong, fit snugly together. Their relationship may
be so mutually functional that it remains stable; yet such an arrange-
ment cannot help but be growth-stunting, since each partner is known,
and knows the other, in only a partial manner. These relationships re-
semble "A-frame" dwellings where the component walls support each
other; remove one partner (or strengthen one in psychotherapy), and
the other falls.
   Ordinarily, however, there is no such mutual fulfillment of needs. At
some level one realizes one is being used rather than engaged and
searches elsewhere for a more fulfilling partner. A thirty-five-year-old
patient of mine, obsessed with the fear of loneliness, was plagued by
the vision of "eating alone at sixty-three." She was consumed by the
search for a permanent bond. Though she was an attractive, vivacious
woman, one man after the other met her and after a short encounter
broke off the relationship. They were driven away, I believe, both by
the intensity and desperation of her love-need and by an awareness
that she had little love to give. An important clue to an understanding
of her dynamics was to be found in her other interpersonal relation-
ships. Highly judgmental, she rapidly, and contemptuously, dismissed
all those who were not potential mates. When treating a patient who
has difficulty establishing an enduring relationship, it is always re-
warding for the therapist to inquire deeply about the texture of the pa-
tient's other, less intense relationships. Love problems are not situa-
tion-specific. Love is not a specific encounter but an attitude. A
problem of not-being-loved is more often than not a problem of not
loving.
   A particularly clear example of relating to others to avoid confront-
ing isolation occurred in the treatment of Charles, the patient with can-
cer who was introduced into an outpatient psychotherapy group (see
chapter 5). Charles began therapy because he wanted to improve his re-
lationships with people. He had always been withdrawn and aloof and
had settled comfortably into this distant mode of relating to others. The
advent of his cancer and the prognosis of a two-year life expectancy re-
sulted in his feeling of great isolation and catalyzed his efforts to get
closer to others. The illustrative incident I shall describe began when
one member, Dave, informed the group that because of his job in-ser-
vice training requirements, he would have to leave town-and the
group-for several months. Dave was highly upset by this move, as
were all the other members-aside from Charles. The group members
                                                                      377


                                                           III I ISOLATION
shared with Dave their feelings of sorrow, anger, and disappointment.
I quote from the group summary (the summaries were mailed to the
members after each meeting). 56
      The floor gradually shifted to Charles by my pointing out that he was re-
      sponding to Dave only in a problem solving fashion and I wondered
      what his feelings were. This opened up a truly remarkable episode in
      the group. For quite some period of time Charles denied having any
      feelings whatsoever about Dave's leaving the group. We tried to milk
      feelings out of him without success and wondered whether or not he
      would want people to miss him if he were leaving. That too didn't get
      anywhere. I pointed out to him that once he had stated he had a pain in
      his chest when people left the group and he underplayed that by saying
      that was only once. I kept pressing and said that once was enough but he
      smiled and laughed and pushed us all away. After a while then Charles
      told the group, almost as though it were in passing, that he had learned
      from his medical check-up that his cancer was doing much better than
      could possibly have been expected. We then learned that, in fact, his
      medical check-up had been on that very day. Dave asked him, Why
      didn't you tell us before? Charles's excuse was that he wanted to wait
      until Lena came (Lena arrived a few minutes late). I told him that I
      didn't see why he couldn't have told us and then told Lena again when
      she came. Then Charles said a really remarkable thing. Now that he thinks
      his cancer is getting better, he suddenly finds he doesn't want to meet people any
      longer and he finds himself withdrawing.
FUSION
   The human being's "universal conflict" is that one strives to be an
individual, and yet being an individual requires that one endure a
frightening isolation. The most common mode of dealing with this
conflict is through denial: one elaborates a delusion of fusion and pro-
claims in effect, "I am not alone, I am part of others." And so one soft-
ens one's ego boundaries and becomes part of another individual or of
a group that transcends the individual.
   Individuals whose major orientation is toward fusion are generally
labeled "dependent." They live, as Arieti puts it, for the "dominant
other" 57 (and are likely to suffer extraordinary distress in the event of
separation from the dominant other). They submerge their own needs;
they seek to find out what the others wish and make those wishes their
own. Above all, they wish to avoid offense. They choose safety and
merger over individuation. Kaiser's description of such individuals is
particularly clear:
          Their behavior seems to suggest: "Do not take me seriously. I do not
       belong to the category of adults and cannot be counted as such." They
378


8 I Existential Isolation
      are playful but not like someone who likes to play, but like someone
      who does not want (or does not dare?) to appear serious and matter of
      fact. Distressing, and even tragic, events are mentioned laughingly, or in
      a hurried, nonchalant way, as if it were not worthwhile to waste time on
      them. There is also a readiness to talk of their own shortcomings with an
      inclination to exaggerate. Achievements and successes are put in a ridic-
      ulous light, or the report of them is followed by a compensatory enu-
      meration of failures. Their talk frequently might appear chopped up by
      quick transitionless shifts in topic. By taking unusual liberties like blurt-
      ing out naive questions, or using baby talk they indicate that they want
      to be put into the category "non-adult" and should not be counted
      among the grown-up people.""
   Kaiser describes the clinical behavior of a patient particularly bent
on merger with a more powerful figure:
         For eight months G-- had been seeing a man in his late thirties
      who appeared ready to do whatever he understood was being requested
      of him. Whenever G-- had wanted to switch the appointment to an-
      other day or another hour the patient's answer had invariably been,
      "Certainly, Doctor, certainly!" He was always on time, but never seemed
      to mind if G-- were delayed. When, during the hour, the sun came
      out and shone into the patient's eyes, he never would have dared to
      draw the drapes and lower the blinds. He sat in silence, painfully blink-
      ing and twisting his neck until G-- remarked on it. The patient then
      would respond as if G-- had asked him to let the blinds down, "Cer-
      tainly, doctor, certainly!" he would say, jumping up from his chair and
      unhooking the cord. "This way, Doctor? Is this too much?" 59
  Fusion as an answer to existential isolation provides a construct by
which many clinical syndromes may be understood. Consider, for ex-
ample, transvestism. Ordinarily men with transvestism are understood
to be motivated by castration anxiety. There is such threat in being a
man, in competing for women with other men, that the man opts out of
competition by dressing as a woman-at which point, his castration
anxiety, assuaged by self-inflicted castration, is able to achieve genital
sexual release. However, Rob, whom I discussed in Chapter 4, illus-
trates how "fusion" may be a central organizing dynamic. Rob had
cross-dressed since he was thirteen first using the clothes of his sister
and then those of his mother. Too frightened of males to develop rela-
tionships with them and too fearful of rejection to approach females,
Rob had always been extraordinarily isolated. His fantasies while cross-
dressing were always nonsexual and always variations on a fusion
theme: he simply imagined going up to a group of women who would
welcome him into their company and consider him one of them. His
                                                                               379


                                                  III I ISOLATION
interpersonal style in a therapy group reflected his desire for merger-
docile, obsequious, pleading for attention from the members but espe-
cially from the therapists whom he exalted. During the course of the
therapy group Rob received an eye-opening education on the possibili-
ties of relationship. He became fully aware-I believe for the first
time-of the extent of his isolation. ''I'm neither here nor there, nei-
ther man nor woman, isolated from everybody," he said one session.
For a while his anxiety (and the incidence of cross-dressing) increased
markedly. Gradually as he developed social skills and related in mean-
ingful ways at first to the group members, and then to individuals in
his life environment, all transvestite desires left him.
   There is, of course, a heavy overlap between the concept of escaping
existential isolation through fusion and the concept of escaping the ter-
ror of death through belief and immersion of oneself in an ultimate
rescuer. Not only Rob, but many of the clinical examples of the defense
of the ultimate rescuer in chapter 4, are descriptive, too, of fusion. Both
concepts describe a mode of escaping anxiety by escaping individu-
ation; in both one looks for solace outside the self. What differentiates
the two is the impetus (isolation anxiety or death anxiety) and the ulti-
mate goal (the search for ego boundary dissolution and merger or the
search for a powerful intercessor). The distinction is, of course, aca-
demic: generally motivations and defensive strategies coexist in the
same individual.
   Fusion eliminates isolation in a radical fashion-by eliminating self-
awareness. Blissful moments of merger are unreflective: the sense of
self is lost. The individual cannot even say, "I have lost my sense of
self," because there is in fusion no separate "I" to say that. The wonder-
ful thing about romantic love is that the questioning lonely "I" disap-
pears into the "we." ''Love," as Kent Bach comments, "is the answer
when there is no question." 60 To lose self-consciousness is often com-
forting. Kierkegaard said: "With every increase in the degree of con-
sciousness, and in proportion to that increase, the intensity of despair
increases: the more consciousness, the more intense the despair." 61
   One may also shed one's isolating sense of self by fusing, not with
another individual, but with a "thing" -a group, a cause, a country, a
project. There is something enormously compelling in merging with a
larger group. Kaiser first became aware of this during an ice-skating
show when two performers, dressed identically, skated a complicated
number in perfect unison. After the applause they nonchalantly and
indifferently adjusted their ties and simultaneously looked at their
watches. Their post-applause synchronization excited the audience
380


8 I Existential Isolation
even more, and Kaiser along with them, and he reflected upon the joys
of ego boundary softening:
           Uniformity of movement and synchronization of movement, if both
        come close enough to perfection, attract, thrill and fascinate an audience
        no matter whether or not the movements performed by a single individ-
        ual would in themselves be pleasing.
           A single well-trained soldier going through the steps and paces, the
        turns and halts of his drill may please the eyes of the training officer; in
        the eyes of any outsider he looks ridiculous. If a whole battalion moves
        over the parade ground, all in step, breaking up the large column into
        smaller groups, all making the turn at exactly the same moment, turning
        again and forming one long straight line and maintaining this unbroken
        front, marching and pivoting around and then, on one short signal,
        freezes on the spot so that all the arms and legs, the helmets, canteens
        and rifles are suddenly at rest, all in exactly the same position with not
        even a single bayonet deviating in direction from all the others, then
        even an ardent antimilitarist cannot help being gripped by this specta-
        cle. And what grips him is certainly not the beauty of right angles and
        straight lines, but the image ... or rather the idea of the many acting as
        though animated by one mind. 62
    To be like everyone else-to conform in dress, speech, customs; to
have no thoughts or feelings that are different-saves one from the iso-
lation of selfhood. Of course the "I" is lost but so is the fear of alone-
ness. The enemies of conformity are, of course, freedom and self-
awareness. The conforming-fusion solution to isolation is undermined
by the questions: What do I want? What do I feel? What is my goal in
life? What do I have in me to express and fulfill?
   In the age-old struggle between self-expression and safety-in-fusion,
it is usually the self that is compromised for the sake of isolation avoid-
ance. The lure of the group is powerful indeed. The Jonestown tragedy
demonstrates-to take one of countless examples-the power of the
group. Identification with the group offered the members a haven
from the fear of isolated existence-a product so valuable that they
were willing to sacrifice everything for it: their worldly goods, their
family, friends, country, and eventually their lives.
   Mysticism, which involves heightened, marvelous moments of one-
ness with the universe, is also an instance of ego loss. Fusion with an-
other individual, with group or cause, with nature or with the universe
always involves a loss of self: it is a pact with Satan and eventuates in
existential guilt-that guilt grief which laments the unlived life in
each of us.
   Sadism. The fusion-seeking individual who is dependent, obsequi-
                                                                               381


                                                  III I ISOLATION
ous, self-sacrificing, who will bear pain, who in fact enjoys pain be-
cause it dispells solitude, who, in short, is anything the other wishes in
return for the safety of merger, has a curious counterpart. One who
seeks to dominate the other, to humiliate the other, to inflict pain, to
make oneself the absolute master over the other, seems very different
from the dependent fusion seeker. Yet, as Fromm points out, "both ten-
dencies are the outcomes of one basic need, springing from the inabil-
ity to bear the isolation and weakness of one's own self.... The sadistic
person needs his object just as much as the masochistic needs his." 63
The difference between the masochist and the sadist is between fuser
and fusee. One seeks security by being swallowed by another; the oth-
er, by swallowing someone else. In both cases existential isolation is as-
suaged-either through losing one's separateness and isolation or
through enlarging oneself by the incorporation of others. That is why
masochism and sadism often oscillate within an individual: they are
different solutions to the same problem.
SEX AND ISOLATION
   Freud introduced the concept of the "symbol" in psychic organiza-
tion. In chapter 5 of The Interpretation of Dreams he describes various
symbols that represent a sexual theme-either the sexual organs or
some sexual act. 64 The idea of one thing "standing in" for another could
be carried too far, Freud warns: a cigar is not always a symbol for ape-
nis; "Sometimes a cigar is just a cigar." But Freud does not go far
enough in his warning. It is possible that sex may be a symbol of some-
thing else. If the deepest ultimate concerns of the human being are ex-
istential in nature and relate to death, freedom, isolation, and meaning-
lessness, then it is entirely possible that these fears may be displaced
and symbolized by such derivative concerns as sexuality.
   Sex may be used in the service of repression of death anxiety. On
several occasions I have worked with patients with metastatic cancer
who seemed obsessed with sexual concerns. I have met with married
couples, one of whom had terminal cancer, who spoke of little else ex-
cept their sexual maladjustment. At times, in the heat of the discussion,
during the recriminations and countercharges, I forgot entirely that
one of these individuals was facing imminent death. Such is the suc-
cess of the defensive maneuver. In chapter 5 I described a young wom-
an with advanced cervical cancer who found that her disease not only
did not discourage male suitors but, on the contrary, seemed to increase
their numbers and their sexual appetites. Ellen Greenspan described
research demonstrating that women with severe breast cancer, in com-
382


8 I Existential Isolation
parison with an age-matched healthy cohort, had a higher incidence of
illicit sexual fantasies. 65
   There is something gloriously magic about the lure of sex. It is a
powerful bulwark against the awareness and the anxiety of freedom,
since we, when under the spell of sex, have no sense whatsoever that
we constitute our world. On the contrary, we are "captured" by a pow-
erful external force. We are driven, enchanted; we "fall for." We can re-
sist the lure, delay it, or give in to it, but we have no sense of "choos-
ing" or "creating" our sexuality: it feels outside of us; it has a force of
its own and seems "bigger than life." Sexually compulsive individuals
in therapy report, as they get better, a sense of bleakness about their
lives. The world is mundanized, and they ask, "Is this all there is?"
   Compulsive sexuality is also a common response to a sense of isola-
tion. Promiscuous sexual "coupling" offers a powerful but temporary
respite to the lonely individual. It is temporary because it is not relat-
edness but only a caricature of relationship. Compulsive sex breaks all
the rules of true caring. The individual uses the other as equipment. He
or she uses, and relates to, only a part of the other. To relate in this
mode means that one forms a relationship, and the quicker the better,
to have sex-rather than the converse situation of sex both as a mani-
festation and a facilitation of a deeper relationship. The sexually com-
pulsive individual is the example, par excellence, of one who does not
relate to the whole being of the other. On the contrary, he relates only
to that part which serves to meet his need. Our language well reflects
this attitude, as when we speak of "a piece of ass," a "jock," a "stud."
The stark language of sex ("laying," "making," "fucking," "screwing,"
"turning a trick," ''scoring") denotes deceit, aggression, manipulation,
almost anything in fact but caring and relatedness.
   Above all, sexually compulsive individuals do not know their part-
ners. In fact, it is often to their advantage not to know the other and to
keep most of themselves hidden; therefore they show and see only
those parts that facilitate seduction and the sexual act. One of the hall-
marks of sexual deviation is that one individual relates not to another
whole person but to some part of another. A fetishist, for example, has
a relationship not with a woman (all published cases of fetishists are
males) but with some part or some accouterment of a woman-for ex-·
ample, a shoe, a handkerchief, a piece of underclothing. One observer
of human relationships went so far as to say, "If we make love to a
woman without relating to her spirit we are fetishists, even if in the
physical act we use the proper body orifice." 66
   Should, therefore, the thoughtful therapist deplore any sexual en-
                                                                        383


                                                     Ill I ISOLATION
counter that falls short of a true and caring interpersonal encounter? Is
there, then, no place for sex as an act of uncommitted adult play? These
questions are to a large extent ethical and moral, and the therapist does
well to avoid making pronouncements on issues that lie outside of his
or her field of expertise. But the therapist does have something of value
to say in the case of those who relate sexually to others only in a partial,
function-oriented manner. An essential part of the definition of sexual
deviancy is that behavior is fixed and exclusive-that is, the deviant
can relate sexually only in a prescribed deviant manner. Not only is rig-
id, exclusive sexual behavior indicative of deeper pathology, but such
behavior cannot help but result in a sense of self-contempt and existen-
tial guilt. Kierkegaard drew an arresting sketch of such a situation in
"The Diary of a Seducer," wherein the protagonist devotes his entire
self to the seduction and abuse of a young girl. 67 Though he is success-
ful in his aims, he pays a heavy price for his spoils: his life becomes
empty, his spirit impoverished.
   Thus, the sexually compulsive individual neither knows or engages
the other. He never concerns himself with the other's growth. Not
only does he never have the other fully in sight but he never loses
sight of himself in the relationship. He does not exist "between" but
always observes himself. Suber termed such an orientation "reflexion"
and bemoaned a sexual relation where the partners do not engage in a
full authentic dialogue but live in a world of monologue, a world of
mirrors and mirroring. Suber's description of "erotic man" is particu-
larly picturesque:
       Many years I have wandered through the land of men, and have not yet
       reached an end of studying the varieties of the "erotic man." There a
       lover stamps around and is in love only with his passion. There one is
       wearing his differentiated feelings like medal-ribbons. There one is en-
       joying the adventures of his own fascinating effect. There one is gazing
       enraptured at the spectacle of his own supposed surrender. There one is
       collecting excitement. There one is displaying his "power." There one is
       preening himself with borrowed vitality. There one is delighting to exist
       simultaneously as himself and as an idol very unlike himself. There one
       is warming himself at the blaze of what has fallen to his lot. There one is
       experimenting. And so on and on-all the manifold monologists with
       their mirrors, in the apartment of the most intimate dialogue! 68
Thus, one is in love with passion, one collects excitement and trophies,
one warms oneself "at the blaze at what has fallen to his lot" -but
what one does not do is to relate authentically to oneself or to another.
   Many of these themes are illustrated in the dreams of Bruce, a sexual-
384


8 I Existential Isolation
ly compulsive patient I described in chapters 5 and 6. Toward the end
of therapy, as he was emerging from a sexually driven mode of relat-
ing, Bruce began to turn his attention to the problems, "If I do not at-
tempt to screw women, what do I do with them?" "And what do I do
with men?" "What are people for anyway?" That last question, "What
are people for anyway?" emerges, in one form or another, in the treat-
ment of all patients who begin to change their modes of relating from
l-It to 1-Thou. Three dreams heralded this stage in Bruce's therapy.
   The first:
       I was lying in bed with my fourteen-year-old son.,We were fully dressed
       but I was trying to have sex with him but I could not find his vagina. I
       woke up sad and frustrated.
This dream graphically depicts Bruce's dilemma about relationships.
"Is there any other way than genitally" the dream seems to say, "that
you can relate to someone, even to someone you care for very much?"
   The second:
       I was playing tennis with a woman but every ball I hit came back to me
       rather than to her. It was as though there were an invisible glass back-
       board instead of a net separating the two of us.
The imagery is clear: Bruce was presumably engaging someone else in
tennis but in fact was relating only to himself. The other person was
extraneous in the game; and, furthermore, even though he tried to
reach her, he could not.
   The third:
       I wanted to be close to Paul [an acquaintance] but I kept bragging about
       how much money I had and he got angry. Then I tried to put my cheek
       next to his but our beards were so rough that we hurt one another.
Bruce had companions in activity-basketball, tennis, and bowling
chums-but had never had a close male friend. He was dimly aware of
his yearning for closeness but, as the dream illustrates, could find no
way to relate to men except in a competitive fashion.
OTHER FORMS OF MISCARRIED RELATIONSHIP
   We try to escape the pain of existential isolation in a variety of ways:
we soften ego boundaries and attempt to fuse with another; we attempt
to incorporate another; we take something from the other that makes
us feel larger, more powerful, or cherished. The common interpersonal
                                                                           385


                                                  Ill I ISOLATION
theme in these attempts and m a number of others, which I shall now
discuss, is that the individual is not with the other person. Instead, the
individual uses the other person as equipment to serve a function, and
a mutually enriching relationship never occurs; instead, there is some
form of misalliance, a relational miscarriage which can only stifle
growth and evoke existential guilt. As the sheer variety of unauthentic
modes of relationship defies any exhaustive classificatory scheme, I
shall describe a few common modes observed in clinical work.
   The Other as Elevator. Barry was a thirty-five-year-old engineer with
the "engineer syndrome": he was stiff, cold, and isolated. He displayed
no emotion whatsoever and was generally aware of emotion only after
he took note of a physiological cue (knot in stomach, tears, clenched
fist, and so forth). His major goal in therapy was to "get in touch with"
his feelings and to be able to establish a love relationship with another.
A physically attractive man, he had little problem attracting the atten-
tion of women but was not able to develop a relationship further. Ei-
ther he found a woman undesirable and dismissed her, or he found her
desirable but was too anxious to pursue her.
   Finally, after many hard months of therapy; Barry began dating and
then living with Jamelia, a young woman whom he found very attrac-
tive. It immediately became apparent, however, that he invested little
of himself in the relationship. He discussed in therapy his new prob-
lem of going to bed very early. Did it mean, he wondered (and this
type of isolation from his feelings was highly characteristic), that he
was already bored with Jamelia, or did it mean that he felt so comfort-
able with her that he allowed himself to relax with her? "How can you
find out?" I asked. "What happens when you ask yourself whether you
love Jamelia?" Barry responded, with unusual conviction for him, that
he cared for Jamelia very much.
   Still, he decided it was best to hold himself back so as not to arouse
her hopes unduly. He explained that the relationship would never
evolve into a long-term one because Jamelia did not quite match up to
what he had been looking for in a woman. The main reason was that
her social skills were not highly enough developed: she was not suffi-
ciently articulate; she was too inhibited and too socially introverted.
He knew that he did not speak well and wanted very much to marry a
woman with greater verbal dexterity: since he learned well by imitat-
ing, he had hoped to improve as a result of contact with such a woman.
 He also expected a woman to provide him with a less restricted social
life. Furthermore, he worried that if the two of them spent too much
 time alone and became very loving, then he would give all his caring
 to her and would never have any to give to others.
386


8 I Existential Isolation
   Barry's statements illustrate many of the most common problems that
preclude the development of an authentic, loving relationship. The
most basic one is that the raison d'etre of Barry's mode of relating was to
serve a function. Barry began from a position of extreme need and
searched for someone to minister to this need. His need was for "eleva-
tion," and he searched for a "partner" who would be elevator: teacher,
therapist, and purveyor of social life.
   Barry often talked despairingly of his long fruitless search for a rela-
tionship. I felt that his use of the word "search" provided a key to un-
derstanding his problem. One, after all, does not find a relationship;
one forms a relationship. Barry approached ]amelia in an inorganic
rather than organic fashion. Not only did he view her as an "it," an
object, as equipment to provide a particular product, but he viewed the
relationship as static and inorganic-an entity that was "there" almost
fully formed from the beginning-rather than as a developing process.
   Another patient voiced the same theme when he said that the closer
he got to another person, the more unattractive that person became-
both physically and emotionally. As he physically approached a wom-
an, he could see her faint skin blemishes, her varicosities, and the bags
under her eyes. As he got to know her well, he became increasingly
bored by her diminishing stock of anecdotes and facts. In such an inor-
ganic approach to relationship, one views the other as an object with
certain fixed properties and depletable resources. What one does not
consider is that, as Suber reminds us, in a genuine organic relationship
there is reciprocity: there is no unchanging I observing (and measur-
ing) the other; the I in the encounter is altered, and the other, the
Thou, is altered as well. Barry viewed love as an exhaustible commod-
ity: the more he offered to one person, the less he would have for oth-
ers. But, as Fromm has taught us, this marketing approach to love
makes no sense: engaging others always leaves one richer not poorer.
   Barry had always experienced intense anxiety at the prospect of ap-
proaching women whom he felt matched his standards. Often he rumi-
nated for hours on the proper approach. He would start to call a wom-
an; hand on the phone, number half-dialed, he would flush with
anxiety and hang up the receiver. Other therapists had unsuccessfully
attempted to afford Barry anxiety relief through behavioral ap-
proaches. In psychotherapy no progress occurred when we approached
 the problem from the obvious vantage point-that is, that Barry feared
competition from other men and rejection from obviously attractive
women; there was, however, considerable progress when we explored
 the ways that Barry used, or wished to use, the other. At a deep level
Barry knew that he was not encountering but violating the other: he
                                                                       387


                                                      III I ISOLATION
did not want her but wanted something from her. His anxiety was guilt
because of the anticipated transgression against another and fear that
the other would discover his motives.
   How Many People Are in the Room? In a mature, caring relationship
one relates with one's whole being to the other. If one holds back part
of oneself in order to observe the relationship or the impact one has
upon the other, then, to that extent, one has failed to relate. Buber de-
scribes the situation that develops when two individuals who retain
full self-consciousness try to relate.
       Let us now imagine two men, whose life is dominated by appearance,
       sitting and talking together. Call them Peter and Paul. Let us list the dif-
       ferent configurations which are involved. First, there is Peter as he
       wishes to appear to Paul, and Paul as he wishes to appear to Peter. Then
       there is Peter as he really appears to Paul-that is, Paul's image of Peter,
       which in general does not in the least coincide with what Peter wishes
       Paul to see; and similarly there is the reverse situation. Further, there is
       Peter as he appears to himself, and Paul as he appears to himself. Lastly,
       there are the bodily Peter and the bodily Paul. Two living beings and six
       ghostly appearances, which mingle in many ways in the conversation
       between the two. Where is there room for any genuine interhuman
       life?""
   One may fail to relate by relating only partly to the other and partly
to some fantasized other person(s). In assessing the nature of my rela-
tionship with a patient, I find it helpful to inquire of myself, "How
many people are in the room?" Am I. for example, thinking not only of
the patient but also of how clever I will sound when I present this pa-
tient at a conference, or of the interesting "clinical material" which I
can use to communicate more effectively with my readers? I pose the
same questions to my patient. Is the patient really relating to me or to
some ghostly figures from the past?
   As the patient describes to me his important relationships, I wonder,
"How many people are in each relationship? Are there only two people
involved? Or three? Or a whole auditorium filled with people?"
   Camus was a master of portraying, in his novels, characters who
could not love but who feigned love for some ulterior purpose. In his
first novel, A Happy Death (unpublished during his lifetime), Camus's
protagonist says:
       He saw that what had attached him to Marthe was vanity not love ....
       What he had loved in Marthe were those evenings when they would
       walk into the movie theater and men's eyes turned towards her, that mo-
       ment when he offered her to the world. What he had loved in her was
       his power and his ambition to live.'"
388


8 I Existential Isolation
'That moment when he offered her to the world." That captures it pre-
cisely. There were never two people in the relationship. He related not
to Marthe but to others through Marthe.
   Similarly, Ken, a patient of mine who had deep-seated problems in
relating authentically to women, dreamed profusely but never had a
dream with only two people in it. An illustrative "tag-along" dream in
the middle of our work:
       I was with a woman in my old bedroom in San Francisco at 2:30 in the
       morning. My brother and father were watching through the window. I
       wasn't too interested in the woman or the lovemaking. I kept my father
       and brother waiting for an hour and let them in at 3:30.
Important associations to the dream included his attempts to identify
the woman. He realized that he was quite uninterested in her. She re-
sembled a young cheerleader he had seen that day at a football game-
the kind of girl he never had the nerve to approach when he was in
college. She also resembled a girl, Christine, he had dated in high
school. He and a friend had both dated the same girl for several
months-a situation that he found both uncomfortable and exhilarat-
ing. Finally, he and his friend joined forces and pressured Christine
into choosing one of them as her steady boyfriend. Christine chose
Ken, much to his delight. However, within only a few weeks the
bloom had faded, Ken lost interest in Christine (he was never interest-
ed in her in the first place; he was interested only in her function in his
competition with his friend) and ended their relationship.
   Ken had always viewed his father and brother as competitors-first
for his mother and then for other women. In the dream, his being with
a woman and keeping his father and brother waiting outside enviously
for an hour (until 3:30 which, incidentally, was the time of our regular
therapy hour) was a way of besting them through a woman. Ken could
not be "with" men either. He related to me, to his brother and father,
to all male friends, in a highly competitive fashion; when he was with
me, for example, he was so convinced that I wanted to subjugate him
that for months he withheld any important material he felt would give
me an "edge" over him. His only male friends were talented but did
not evoke competition since their talent lay in some entirely different
field (music, art, or athletics).
   On the night following the analysis of this dream Ken had a series of
short dreams, all illuminating some aspect of the work to be done in re-
lationships. In the first dream he went to a ski lodge and met several of
                                                                         389


                                                    III I ISOLATION
his male friends who greeted him warmly; then he found himself sit-
ting next to them in a room where he was waiting to take his final real
estate examinations (Ken was a realtor.) After a long wait the exams
were passed out, but immediately the instructor (his therapist) an-
nounced the exam was canceled: they had come to the wrong place on
the wrong day. This dream underscored Ken's fusion of friendship and
competition; the work ahead, in therapy, would entail disentangling
the two.
   The second dream fragment was that Ken saw himself on a jumbo jet-
liner (he often, as do many dreamers, symbolized therapy as a journey
on some vehicle). He strolled along in the aisle on the plane and was
astounded to discover several hidden compartments, all of which were
full of people. Although he saw them for the first time, he somehow
knew that these people had been there all along. Obviously this dream
represented another crucial task in therapy: the discovery of the others
in the world.
   His last dream that night was but a fragment: simply an image of a
large toucan bird. Ken had no associations whatsoever to this bird, but
my association to toucan was "two can" -a representation of the work
in pairing that lay before Ken.
   This "bad faith" mode of relating to others is so common that exam-
ples abound in everyday life and everyday therapy. For example, the
woman who purposefully takes a new boyfriend to a gathering where
she knows her old boyfriend will be is obviously not "with" her new
friend. Karl, another patient, was with a new girlfriend when he re-
ceived an angry, demanding phone call from his previous one. In a de-
risive manner he held the phone away from his ear pointing it to his
new friend so that she, too, could hear. Each of an individual's relation-
ships reflects the others: it is rare, I believe, for one to be able to relate
in bad faith to some individuals and in an authentic, caring way to a se-
lect few. Karl's new friend was deeply troubled at his treatment of a
previous friend. She suspected (and rightly so) that the telephone epi-
sode was an ominous portent of her future relationship with him.
   Being with the other for the sake of another is particularly transpar-
ent in group therapy-a mode of therapy ideally suited to uncover and
work through bad faith in interpersonal relationships. A graphic exam-
ple unfolded over several weeks in one of my therapy groups. Ron, a
forty-year-old married patient, systematically made extra-group con-
tacts with every one of the members even though he and the rest of the
members realized that such socializing often impeded therapy. Ron in-
vited some members to go sailing, others to go skiing, and others to
390


 8 I Existential Isolation
dinner and became intensely romantically involved with one, Irene.
Extra-group socializing is usually destructive in group therapy only
when it is surrounded by a conspiracy of silence. In this group, therapy
ground to a halt because Ron refused to discuss his extra-group con-
tacts, especially those with Irene; he saw nothing "wrong" with them
and steadfastly refused to examine the meaning of his behavior.
   In one session the group discussed his inviting my female co-thera-
pist for a skiing weekend. Enormous pressure was placed on him to ex-
amine his behavior, and he left the session confused and shaken. On
his way home Ron suddenly remembered that in his childhood his fa-
vorite story had been Robin Hood. Following an impulse, he drove to
the children's section of the nearest public library and reread the story.
Only then did the meaning of his behavior make sense. What he loved
about the Robin Hood legend was the rescuing of individuals, especial-
ly women, from tyrants. That motif had played a powerful role in his
life, beginning with oedipal struggles in his family. He had started a
successful business by first working for someone else and then setting
up a competitive firm and enticing his ex-boss's employees to work for
him. So, too, with his wife whom he had married not so much because
of love for her but to rescue her from a tyrannical father.
   Similarly, the pattern unfolded in the group. He was strongly moti-
vated to wrench the other members, even the co-therapist, from my
grasp. The other members gradually expressed their deep dismay at
having been mere pawns in Ron's struggle with me. When his pre-
dominant, inauthentic mode of relationship was laid bare and fully un-
derstood, Ron began to confront the question of "What else are people
for?" He spent several months working on his relationship with each
of the members, save Irene. He clung tightly to her; and even when it
was clear that he had made all the progress possible for him in that
group he resisted termination because, at an unconscious level, he
wanted to be present so as to protect her from me. He eventually termi-
nated, and a few months later Irene did as well. At that point, without
the tyrant in the picture, Ron's love waned quickly, and he ended the
relationship.
   A full caring relationship is a relationship to another, not to any ex-
traneous figure from the past or the present. Transference, parataxic
distortions, ulterior motives and goals- all must be swept away before
an authentic relation with another can prevail.
                                                                       391


                  CHAPTER 9
         Existential Isolation
           and Psychotherapy
E   XISTENTIAL ISOLATION has seve'al majo' implications fo' psy-
chotherapists. It provides them with a frame of reference that explains
many complex, puzzling phenomena-explanations that therapists,
through clarifying and interpretive comments, attempt to convey to
their patients. The concept of existential isolation also provides the ra-
tionale for an important therapeutic maneuver-isolation confronta-
tion. Finally, a consideration of existential isolation sheds considerable
light upon that enormously important and complex phenomenon-the
therapist-patient relationship.
    A Guide to Understanding Interpersonal Relationships
Individuals who are terrified of isolation generally attempt to assuage
that terror through an interpersonal mode: they need the presence of
others to affirm their existence; they long to be swallowed by others
392


9 I Existential Isolation and Psychotherapy
greater than they, or they seek to alleviate their sense of lonely help-
lessness by swallowing others; they attempt to elevate themselves
through others; they search for multiple sexual bondings-a caricature
of authentic relating. In short, the individual who is flooded with iso-
lation anxiety reaches out desperately for help through a relationship.
The individual reaches out, not because he or she wants to but because
he or she has to; and the ensuing relationship is based on survival not
on growth. The tragic irony is that those who so desperately need the
comfort and pleasure of an authentic relationship are the very ones
least able to form such a relationship.
   One of the therapist's first tasks is to help the patient identify and
apprehend what he or she does with others. The characteristics of a
need-free relationship provide the therapist with an ideal or a horizon
against which the patient's interpersonal pathology is starkly silhou-
etted. Does, for example, the patient relate exclusively to those who can
provide something for him? Is his love focused on receiving rather
than giving? Does he attempt to know, in the fullest sense, the other
person? How much of himself is held back? Does he genuinely listen to
the other person? Does he use the other to relate to yet another-that
is, how many people are in the room? Does he care about the growth of
the other?
   The group therapy situation offers a particularly rich arena for these
patterns of distorted relationship to manifest themselves, as in the fol-
lowing clinical cameo:
   Eve had been attending a therapy group for six months and had
gradually created (as patients always do) the same type of interpersonal
pattern in the group that she inhabited outside it. She was a marginal
figure, passive, easily forgettable. No one took her seriously; she did
not apparently take herself seriously and seemed content with being
the group mascot. Over the Christmas holiday when the group was un-
usually small since some members had gone out of town, Eve began the
session by describing her discomfort at such a small group. She was not
sure, she said, she was up to an "intense session." She continued to dis-
cuss in a characteristically detached manner her feelings about a small
group. Finally another woman member said she could not bear to listen
to Eve any more. No one in the group felt that Eve was talking to them;
Eve always spoke to an empty space in the group as though there was
no one else present in the room. The members then commented that
Eve engaged no one in the group, that no one really knew her, that she
remained hidden from view; and that consequently none of the others
allowed her to matter to them.
                                                                      393


                                                             III I ISOLATION
  I asked Eve if she could try to engage any of the members. She com-
pliantly went around the group and discussed, in a platitudinous man-
ner, her feelings toward each person. "How would you rank," I asked,
"your comments to each member on a one-to-ten risk-taking scale?"
"Very low," she ventured, "about two to three." "What would hap-
pen," I said, "if you were to move up a rung or two?" She replied that
she would tell the group that she was an alcoholic! This was, indeed, a
revelation-she had told no one before. I then tried to help her open
herself even more by asking her to talk about how she felt coming to
the group for so many months and not being able to tell us that ... Eve
responded by talking about how lonely she felt in the group, how cut
off she was from every person in the room. But she was flushed with
shame about her drinking. She could not, she insisted, be "with" oth-
ers or make herself known to others because of her drinking.
   I turned Eve's formula around (here the real therapeutic work be-
gan): she did not hide herself because she drank, but she drank because she hid
herself! She drank because she was so unengaged with the world. Eve
then talked about coming home, feeling lost and alone, and at that
point doing one of two things: either slumping into a reverie where
she imagined herself very young and being cared for by the big peo-
ple, or assuaging the pain of her lostness and loneliness with alcohol.
Gradually Eve began to understand that she was relating to others for a
specific function-to be protected and taken care of-and that, in the
service of this function, she was relating only partially. She saw only
part of another individual and chose to disclose only those parts of her-
self that she felt would not drive away a protector.
   After obtaining a clear view of how others viewed her behavior, Eve
also was able to learn how her behavior made others feel. (This feature
is one of the real strengths of the group therapy approach: though it is
possible for the individual therapist to supply this information to a pa-
tient, the great diversity of feedback from a larger group is far more
informative and powerful.) She discovered that her neediness did not
elicit the caring she sought; quite the contrary, her reluctance to en-
gage others with her whole self resulted in her not mattering to them.
Eve failed to get what she wanted because she needed it too much.
   There is, as this vignette illustrates, considerable therapeutic poten-
   • AI. a general principle of therapy technique, it is always preferable to approach dis-
closure of a big secret by helping the patient to reveal more about the disclosure ("hori-
zontal" or "meta"-disclosure) rather than asking for more of the specific details ("verti-
cal" disclosure) of the secret. Thus, the patient may be enabled to make himself fully
known to the others in the immediate moment.
394


9 I Existential Isolation and Psychotherapy
tial in the understanding of current relationships-of which the thera-
pist-patient relationship is the most accessible for study and is, in ways
I shall discuss shortly, enormously effective in therapy. The patient's
relationships with others should, however, always be investigated. Re-
lationships among patients in treatment (therapy group, inpatient
halfway house, day hospital, and so on) rarely develop into long-
lasting, rewarding friendships outside of therapy. Nonetheless,
through such relationships patients will display interpersonal pathol-
ogy. In ways I have already described, therapists may use this first-
hand data as a guide to understanding the specific form of their pa-
tients' misaligned relationships and to help patients to recognize the
nature of their interpersonal behavior, its impact upon others, and
their responsibility for their own isolation. In-treatment relationships
also provide a "dress rehearsal" for a patient's future relationships in
the "real world" -a low-risk venture in which he or she can test out
new modes of relating.
   Thus far I have described the uses of in-therapy relationships. But
they are more than a forum for pathology display or a dress rehearsal:
they are also real relationships with real people, which contain some-
thing in and for themselves that is meaningful and healing. Some pa-
tients enter a psychiatric ward and initiate little contact with others.
They speak when spoken to; they stay in their rooms whenever possi-
ble; they occupy themselves with thinking, "sorting things out" in
their minds, rug crocheting, reading, and so on.
   Patients proffer many reasons for such withdrawal (such as depres-
sion, fear of rejection, or "nothing in common" with others), but one
common reason is the feeling that there is no point in investing energy
into something that will perforce be evanescent. A patient says that a
relationship with another patient cannot last, that they travel in differ-
ent "circles" (forgetting the "circles" they share-the terrestrial orbit,
the life cycle)-why, then, get involved? Others point out that they
cannot bear losses, and they prefer to cultivate only those relationships
that have the potential to become long-term friendships.
   These arguments have persuasive features. After all, one of the prob-
lems of modern life is its impermanence, its lack of stable institutions
and social networks. Indeed, what point is there in cultivating yet an-
other impermanent, "vacation cruise" relationship?
   A clinical case provides us some insight into this issue. Anna, a bor-
derline patient who had been hospitalized following a suicide gesture,
was an exceptionally isolated, embittered young woman. One funda-
mental question she pondered continuously was "What are people
                                                                       395


                                                      III I ISOLATION
for?" She avoided engagement with others in group meetings because
she said that she refused to indulge in the phoniness surrounding su-
perficial relationships. Whenever she reached out to another, or ex-
pressed any kind of sentiment, her inner voice soon reminded her of
the fact that she was being a phony and that, verily, nothing she said
was a true feeling. Anna felt lonely and frightened. She was always the
outsider walking down the cold, dark street observing and coveting
the warm lights and cozy gatherings in other people's homes. In her
small group sessions I consistently urged her to attempt to engage oth-
ers. "Stop analyzing, stop reflecting upon yourself," she was advised.
"Just try to extend yourself to others in the group. Try to enter their ex-
periential world. Try to open yourself up as much as possible and don't
ask why." During a particularly intense group meeting Anna became
deeply involved with several members, indeed weeping with and for
one of them. Toward the end of this meeting Anna was asked to de-
scribe what her experience had been like over the past hour. (Effective
use of the here-and-now in therapy always entails two processes: sheer
experiencing and the subsequent examination of that experience.)
Anna noted that she had been alive for an hour, swept along in life, in-
volved with others and unaware of herself and of her sense of desola-
 tion. For an hour she had been inside life rather than outside staring at
it through a chilly windowpane.
   Anna's experience during the group supplied an answer to her ques-
tion "What are people for?" She could, for a short time, appreciate that
relationships enrich one's inner world. Though she would shortly, I
was certain, try to take away the experience by labeling it phony, she
had nonetheless experienced how a relationship can bridge the gulf of
isolation. One is altered through an encounter with another, even a
brief encounter. One internalizes the encounter; it becomes an internal
reference point, an omnipresent reminder of both the possibility and
the reward of a true encounter.
   A striking example of the lasting impact of a brief encounter is pro-
vided by Bertrand Russell who in 1913 met Joseph Conrad:
       At our very first meeting, we talked with continually increasing intima-
       cy. We seemed to sink through layer after layer of what was superficial,
       till gradually both reached the central fire. It was an experience unlike
       any other that I have known. We looked into each other's eyes, half ap-
       palled and half intoxicated to find ourselves together in such a region.
       The emotion was as intense as passionate love, and at the same time all-
       embracing, I came away bewildered, and hardly able to find my way
       among ordinary affairs. 1
396


9 I Existential Isolation and Psychotherapy
Though Russell spent but a few hours with Conrad, he reports that he
was never the same again, that something of the moment of their
touching remained always with him and played an instrumental role
in shaping his attitudes toward war, minor misfortunes, and his subse-
quent human relations. 2
   It is possible to err in the opposite direction-to avoid enduring inti-
mate relationships by involving oneself only in brief encounters; and
the therapist must be attuned to this possibility. But one must also bear
in mind that no relationship offers a guarantee of permanency. Because
a relationship may have no future reality, why strip it of its current re-
ality? Indeed, individuals who elect to relate only to a select few are
most likely those who have the most difficulty engaging others. Their
dread of isolation will be so great that, as I have described, they sabo-
tage the possibility of relationship. Those, on the other hand, who are
likely to extend themselves continuously and in authentic fashion to
others will, through the peopling of their inner world, experience a
tempering of their existential anxiety and be able to reach out to others
in love rather than to grasp at them in need.
                Confronting the Patient with Isolation
Another important step in treatment consists of helping the patient to
address existential isolation directly, to explore it, to plunge into his or
her feelings of lostness and loneliness. One of the fundamental facts
that patients must discover in therapy is that, though interpersonal en-
counter may temper existential isolation, it cannot eliminate it. Patients
who grow in psychotherapy learn not only the rewards of intimacy but
also its limits: they learn what they cannot get from others. Some years
ago in a project I described in chapter 6, my colleagues and I studied a
number of successful psychotherapy patients and attempted to deter-
mine which aspects of their therapy experience had been most helpful
to them. Of sixty items administered for a rank ordering (Q-sort) proce-
dure, the one bearing on the limitations of intimacy ("Recognizing that
no matter how close I get to other people, I must still face life alone") was
highly ranked by many patients and over all ranked twenty-third of
the sixty items. 3
                                                                          397


                                                     III I ISOLATION
   There is, of course, no "solution" to isolation. It is part of existence,
and we must face it and find a way to take it into ourselves. Commu-
nion with others is our major available resource to temper the dread of
isolation. We are all lonely ships on a dark sea. We see the lights of oth-
er ships-ships that we cannot reach but whose presence and similar
situation affords us much solace. We are aware of our utter loneliness
and helplessness. But if we can break out of our windowless monad, we
become aware of the others who face the same lonely dread. Our sense
of isolation gives way to a compassion for the others, and we are no
longer quite so frightened. An invisible bond unites individuals who
participate in the same experience-whether it be a life experience
shared in time or place (for example, attending the same school) or sim-
ply as a member of an audience at some event.
   But compassion and its twin, empathy, require a certain degree of
equilibrium; they cannot be constructed on panic. One must begin to
confront and tolerate isolation to be able to use the available resources
to cope more fully with one's existential situation. God offers relief
from isolation for many; but, as Alfred North Whitehead asserted, iso-
lation is a condition of true spiritual belief: "Religion is what the indi-
vidual does with his own solitariness ... and if you are never solitary,
you are never religious." 4 Part of the therapist's task consists of helping
the patient confront isolation-an enterprise that first generates anxi-
ety but ultimately catalyzes personal growth. In The Art of Loving,
Fromm wrote that "the ability to be alone is the condition for the abili-
ty to love," and, in those days in the United States, before the 1960s
and transcendental meditation, suggested modes of solitary concentra-
tion upon consciousness. 5
   Clark Moustakas, in his essay on loneliness, made the same point:
       The individual in being lonely, if let be, will realize himself in loneli-
       ness and create a bond or sense of fundamental relatedness with others.
       Loneliness rather than separating the individual or causing a break or
       division of self, expands the individual's wholeness, perceptiveness,
       sensitivity and humanity. 6
Many others corroborate that isolation must be experienced before it
can be transcended. Camus, for example: "When a man has learned-
and not on paper-how to remain alone with his suffering, how to
overcome his longing to flee, then he has little left to learn." 7 Similar-
 ly, Robert Hobson: "To be a human being means to be lonely. To go on
becoming a person means exploring new modes of resting in our
 loneliness." 8
398


9 I Existential Isolation and Psychotherapy
   I like the phrase "exploring new modes of resting in our loneliness."
It is an arresting description of the task of the therapist. Yet the phrase
contains the germ of the clinical problem: rather than "rest," the psy-
chotherapy patient writhes in loneliness. The problem seems to be that
the rich get richer and the poor get poorer. Those who can confront
and explore their isolation can learn to relate in a mature loving fash-
ion to others; yet only those who can already relate to others and have
attained some modicum of mature growth are able to tolerate isolation.
Robert Bollendorf, for example, demonstrated that the higher an indi-
vidual's level of self-actualization (measured by the Personal Orienta-
tion Inventory) the less isolation anxiety (measured by the Anxiety
Scale of the IGPE inventory) that individual experienced when placed
in sixteen-hour solitary confinement. 9
   Otto Will, from the perspective of his long experience treating dis-
turbed adolescents and young adults, observed that individuals from
loving, reciprocally respectful families, are able, with relative ease, to
grow away from their families and to tolerate the separation and the
loneliness of young adulthood. What happens to those who grow up in
tormented, highly conflicted families? One might expect that they
would kick up their heels with joy at the prospect of dancing away
from such a family. But the opposite occurs: the more disturbed the
family, the harder it is for progeny to leave: they are ill equipped to
separate, and cling to the family for shelter against isolation anxiety.'"
   The therapist must find a way to help a patient confront isolation in
a dosage and with a support system suited to that patient. Some thera-
pists, at an advanced stage of therapy (once other sources of anxiety are
worked through and the therapeutict.relationship has become positive
and robust), advise or prescribe periods of self-enforced isolation dur-
ing the course of therapy. There are two possible benefits of such isola-
tion. First, important material may be generated. Recall Bruce, the pa-
tient in chapter 5, who, as a result of a few hours isolation, became
aware of his terror of loneliness and death which he had all his life
avoided through workaholism and compulsive sexuality. Secondly, the
patient discovers hidden resources and courage. Linda Sherby de-
scribes a patient whose symptoms were frenzied activity and an unsa-
tisfying, dependent posture toward would-be relationships. 11 In an ef-
fort to break through an impasse, the therapist suggested to the patient
that she spend twenty-four hours alone in a motel cut off from all dis-
tractions (people, television, books, and so on), except for writing a dia-
ry of her thoughts and feelings. The major outcome, and it was of con-
siderable import for this patient, was that she learned she could
                                                                        399


                                                   III I ISOLATION
tolerate isolation without panic. The patient's notes are explicit in this
regard: "I'm still amazed at how together my head must be-perhaps
it's too soon for me to decompensate, /but it's been nine hours so far,
and I don't think I'm going to crash." Toward the end of the twenty-
four hours she wrote to her therapist: "It is obvious I am not going to
go berserk, and I expect you knew that all along. The sadness is becom-
ing a part of me, and I doubt that it will be so easy to run from it
again!"
   Several years ago my colleagues and I performed an experiment that
adventitiously demonstrated the degree to which personal growth is
catalyzed by isolation. 12 In an effort to test the impact of affect arousal
(in a weekend encounter group) upon long-term individual therapy,
we sponsored weekend group experiences at a country inn for three
groups of patients: two experimental affect-arousing gestalt groups and
one control Zen meditation group. We attempted to measure the im-
pact of the gestalt group experience on the subjects and assumed that
the non-affect arousal meditation group would serve as a relatively sta-
ble control condition. The results indicated otherwise. There were un-
planned "nonspecific" variables that vastly influenced the outcome.
One of the important nonspecific variables was the experience of isola-
tion. Many individuals in both the experimental and the control
groups reported that a significant facet of their experience was that
they were removed from their familiar surroundings and encountered
isolation. Indeed, several of the women subjects said that the weekend
was the first time in years (in one instance, twenty years) that they had
been separated from their families and had spent a night alone without
their husbands in bed beside them and their children sleeping nearby.
The impact of the confrontation with isolation was so strong that for
some it dwarfed the significance of the affect arousal, the variable un-
der scrutiny.
   The practice of meditation offers another avenue to isolation aware-
ness. Though meditation therapists and teachers do not often concep-
tualize the benefit of meditation precisely in this manner, I believe that
one of the primary growth-inducing factors in meditation is that it per-
mits individuals in an anxiety-reduced state (that is, anxiety-relieving
muscular relaxation, posture, breathing, mind cleansing) to face and to
transcend the anxiety they associated with isolation.
    Individuals learn to face what they fear the most. They are asked to
plunge into isolation-and, even more important, to plunge nakedly,
without customary shields of denial. They are asked to "let go" (rather
than to achieve and acquire), to empty their minds (rather than to cate-
gorize and analyze experience), and to respond to and harmonize with
400


9 I Existential Isolation and Psychotherapy
the world (rather than to control and subdue it). Certainly one of the
explicit goals of the meditational state, one of the states one must
achieve on the path to enlightenment (satori), is awareness that phys-
ical reality is in fact a veil obscuring reality, and that only by reaching
deep into one's isolation is one able to remove that veil. But recogni-
tion of the illusionary nature of reality or, as I described in chapter 6,
awareness of one's constitutive function, invariably plunges one into a
confrontation with existential isolation, into an awareness that not
only is one isolated from others but, at the most fundamental leveL iso-
lated from world as well.
            Isolation and the Patient-Therapist Encounter
IT IS THE RELATIONSHIP THAT HEALS
   I remember two maxims of psychotherapy that I learned in the very
beginning of my training. I discussed the first-"the goal of psycho-
therapy is to bring the patient to the point where he can make a free
choice" -in the section on freedom. The second-"it is the relation-
ship that heals" -is the single most important lesson the psychothera-
pist must learn. There is no more self-evident truth in psychotherapy;
every therapist observes over and over in clinical work that the en-
counter itself is healing for the patient in a way that transcends the
therapist's theoretical orientation.
   If any single fact has been established by psychotherapy research, it
is that a positive relationship between patient and therapist is positive-
ly related to therapy outcome. Effective therapists respond to their pa-
tients in a genuine manner; they establish a relationship that a patient
perceives as safe and accepting; they display a nonpossessive warmth
and a high degree of accurate empathy and are able to "be with" or
"grasp the meaning" of a patient. Several reviews that summarize hun-
dreds of research studies concur in this conclusion ... 13
   In the first chapter I likened psychotherapy to an experience I had in
   • Elsewhere in this book I have cited empirical research, but generally in a highly se-
lective manner and with much caution. Either the research was scanty, poorly conceived
or executed, or of doubtful relevance to the existential concern under discussion. In re-
spect to the therapist-patient relationship, I shall also not fully cite the research litera-
ture-but for an entirely different reason: the overwhelming amount of high-quality re-
search documenting the crucial importance of this relationship.
                                                                                        401


                                                      III I ISOLATION
a cooking class: what seems to make the vital difference in both Arme-
nian eggplant dishes and in psychotherapy are the "throw-ins," the
"off the record" contributions. It is in the realm of the therapist-patient
relationship that these "throw-ins" most frequently occur. During the
course of effective psychotherapy the therapist frequently reaches out
to the patient in a human and deeply personal manner. Though this
reaching out is often a critical event in therapy, it resides outside offi-
cial ideological doctrine; it is generally not reported in psychiatric lit-
erature (usually because of shame or fear of censure) nor is it taught to
students (both because it lies outside of formal theory and because it
might encourage "excesses").
   An excellent illustration of the importance of the patient-therapist
encounter is to be found in a book called Critical Incidents in Psychothera-
PY ( 1959), which described a number of incidents that therapists re-
garded as constituting turning points in therapy. 14 A substantial major-
ity of these critical incidents consist of a therapist's stepping outside of
his or her professional role and engaging a patient in a deeply human
fashion. A few examples:
    1. At this point Tom [the patient] looked me in the eye and very clearly and
       slowly said, "If you give me up, then there is no hope for me." At this
       moment I was overwhelmed with a complex and powerful set of emo-
       tions composed of sorrow, hatred, pity, and inadequacy. This sentence of
       Tom's became a "critical incident" for me. I was at that moment closer to
       him than I had ever been to any person on earth. 15
    2. A therapist saw an acutely ill patient for an emergency session Saturday
       afternoon and though the therapist was hungry and tired continued the
       session for several hours. 16
    3. A therapist met with a patient who during the course of therapy devel-
       oped signs suggesting cancer. While she was awaiting the results of
       medical laboratory tests (which subsequently proved negative) he held
       her in his arms like a child while she sobbed and in her terror exper-
       ienced a brief psychotic state. 17
    4. A male therapist working with a young female patient who had such a
       powerful positive eroticized transference to him that therapeutic work
       was not possible disclosed to her some aspects of his personal life which
       permitted the patient to sort out real from distorted perceptions of him. 18
    5. For several sessions a patient had been abusing a therapist by attacking
       him personally and by questioning his professional skills. Finally the
       therapist exploded: "I began pounding the desk with my fist and shout-
       ed, Dammit-look, why don't you just quit the verbal diarrhea and let's
       get down to the business of trying to understand yourself, and stop beat-
       ing on me? Whatever faults I have, and I do have a lot of them, have
       nothing to do with your problems. I'm a human being too, and today has
       been a bad day .... " 19
402


9 I Existential Isolation and Psychotherapy
    6. A patient had been abandoned in a desolate house perched on a cliff ac-
       cessible only by a rickety wooden bridge. In extremis, she called her
       therapist who came to the house, crossed the bridge, consoled her and
       drove her to her home!"
The other critical incidents are similar: in each the thrust is clearly
toward a human encounter and away from artificial or ideologically
prescribed "handling" of the patient.
   Corroborating illustrations of this phenomenon abound in the litera-
ture. In chapter 2 I discussed how, in 1895 in Studies in Hysteria, Freud
and Breuer overlooked considerable material relating to death. 21 It is
striking, too, that in his assessment of therapeutic mechanisms Freud
may have overlooked the importance of the patient-therapist encoun-
ter. He attributed therapeutic change entirely to hypnotic suggestion
and to interpretive work which makes possible "abreaction" and re-
lease of "strangulated affect." Yet note the nature of Freud's therapeu-
tic involvement which he described in his case histories. He regularly
gave some of his patients a massage and in one passage expressed his
annoyance that the patient's menstrual period might make the massage
impossible that day. On other occasions he "swings boldly" (to use
Buber's term)22 into the life of the patient by speaking to family mem-
bers and by clarifying the patient's financial and marital prospects. At
other times Freud was authoritarian and harsh. In one memorable en-
counter he adamantly told a patient that he would give her twenty-
four hours to change her beliefs (about the nonpsychological causes of
a symptom) or she would have to leave the hospital. 23
   Several years ago I established a contract (for reasons not germane to
this discussion) with a patient which stipulated that we both would
write impressionistic summaries after each individual therapy hour,
deliver them sealed to my secretary, and every few months read each
other's notes. (Later we published these notes in the book Every Day
Gets a Little Closer: A Twice-Told Therapy 24 ) What impressed me very
much was the discrepancy between my perceptions of an hour and
those of the patient. The patient and I attended to, and valued, very
different aspects of the therapy experience. What of my precious and
elegant interpretations? Alas, she never even heard them! What she
cherished were the small personal touches-a warm look, a compli-
ment about the way she looked, my unswerving interest in her, my
asking her opinion about a movie she had seen.
   What are we to make of these observations? It seems clear that in
some as yet undefined fashion the therapist-patient personal relation-
ship is crucial to the process of change, and also that the therapist often
                                                                          403


                                                    III I ISOLATION
underestimates the importance of this factor and overestimates that of
his cognitive contributions.
   How Does the Therapeutic Relationship Heal? In the previous section I
suggested that the patient's "in-therapy" relationships (those in his or
her current life or with other members of a therapy group or psychiat-
ric hospital ward) have two types of therapeutic effect: (1) they are
"mediating/' in that they improve the quality of other, future relation-
ships by instructing patients about their maladaptive interpersonal be-
havior and by serving as "dress rehearsals" for new modes of relating;
(2) they have value in and for themselves-as "real" relationships, they
effect intrapersonal shifts.
   The same paradigm holds for the therapist-patient relationship. It
heals by illuminating other relationships and also by virtue of afford-
ing a real relationship to the patient. Let us consider each mode in
turn.
   Patient-therapist relationship: Illumination and facilitation of other rela-
tionships. The therapist, by helping a patient examine the patient-
therapist relationship, illuminates and facilitates the patient's past or
current relationships with those who, in some symbolic way, resemble
the therapist.
   The use of the relationship to illuminate the past is the traditional
transference approach to the patient-therapist relationship, where the
patient "transfers" feelings and attitudes from important figures, espe-
cially parental ones, onto the person of the therapist. The patient dress-
es the therapist, who serves as a mannikin, with feelings that have
been stripped from others. The relationship with the therapist is a
shadow play, reflecting the vicissitudes of a drama that transpired long
ago. The analytic therapeutic goal of recapturing and illuminating
events in early life is well served in this approach.
   There are two basic objections to working with relationships in this
manner. First, as I discussed in chapter 7, there is no evidence that un-
covering and understanding the past is mutative in therapy. The sec-
ond is that viewing the therapist-patient relationship primarily in
terms of transference negates the truly human, and truly mutative, na-
ture of the relationship. There is much evidence for the argument that
it is the real relationship that heals; and to view the therapist-patient
relationship as a crate to transport the merchandise of healing (insight,
uncovering the events of early life, and so on) is to mistake the contain-
er for the contents. The relationship is the merchandise of healing; and,
as I have stressed earlier, the search for insight, the task of excavating
the past, are all interesting, seemingly profitable ventures that engage
404


9 I Existential Isolation and Psychotherapy
the attention of patient and therapist while the real agent of change,
their relationship, is germinating.
   Another use of the patient-therapist relationship is to help the pa-
tient understand current or future relationships. The patient almost in-
variably will distort some aspects of his or her relationship to the thera-
pist. The experienced therapist, drawing from his or her own self-
knowledge and wide experience of how others view him or her is able
to help the patient distinguish distortion from reality. The therapist
may represent different things to different patients, but to most pa-
tients he or she embodies images of authority-teacher, boss, parent,
judge, supervisor, and so forth. By helping the patient improve his or
her relationships to such individuals, the therapist performs a real
service.
   The "real" relationship between therapist and patient. There is enor-
mous potential benefit in the patient's developing a real (as opposed to
a transferential) relationship to the therapist. Rather than the relation-
ships being an "as if" phenomenon-one that, analyzed properly, will
facilitate other relationships-the therapist helps to heal by developing
a genuine relationship with the patient.
   Kaiser, as I discussed earlier, believed that the individual, bedeviled
by isolation (the "universal conflict"), attempts to deal with it by ef-
fecting a "fusion" with another. To pave the way for fusion, the "uni-
versal symptom," as Kaiser put it, arises. The "universal symptom" is
"duplicity" or "ingenuineness" or "transference" and consists of both
distorted perception of and behavior toward the therapist. Thus, the
patient does not relate with his true self but engages the therapist in
such a way as to escape isolation and to effect fusion.
   And the antidote to this universal conflict and symptom? Kaiser's an-
swer was "communication." 25 He posited that "it was the ability to
communicate freely that prevented the universal conflict from forcing
a person into the restrictive delusionary pattern of neurosis." The
therapist healed, Kaiser believed, simply by being with the patient. Suc-
cessful therapy requires "that the patient spends sufficient time with a
person of certain personality characteristics."
   What personality characteristics? Kaiser cited four: (1) an interest in
people; (2) theoretical views on psychotherapy that do not interfere
with his or her interest in helping the patient to communicate freely;
(3) the absence of neurotic patterns that would interfere with the estab-
lishment of communication with the patient; (4) the mental disposition
of "receptiveness"-being sensitive to duplicity or to the noncommun-
icative elements in the patient's behavior.
                                                                       405


                                                    III I ISOLATION
   Kaiser offers only one rule for the therapist: "communicate." All oth-
er requirements pertain not to what the therapist must do but to what
the therapist must be. Though Kaiser may overstate the matter, he
nonetheless calls our attention to the essential cog in the process of
therapeutic change. Psychotherapy for most patients is a cyclical pro-
cess from isolation into relationship. Once a patient is able to relate
deeply to a therapist (and to relate to him or her as a real person, not as
a hologram manufactured by "technique"), then he or she has already
changed. The patient learns that the potential for love exists within
oneself and experiences feelings that have lain dormant in dissociated
realms for years or decades. Recall Buber's comments about the I-Thou
relationship: when the "I" truly relates to another, it is changed, it is
different from the pre-Thou "1." It experiences new aspects of itself, it
opens up not only to the other but to itself as well. No matter that the pa-
tient's relationship to the therapist is "temporary," the experience of in-
timacy is permanent. It can never be taken away. It exists in one's inner
world as a permanent reference point: a reminder of one's potential for
intimacy. The discovery of self that ensues as a result of intimacy is also
permanent.
   It scarcely needs to be said that the experience of an intimate en-
counter with a therapist has implications for the individual that extend
beyond relationships with most other people. For one thing, the thera-
pist is generally someone whom the patient particularly respects. But
even more important, the therapist is someone, often the only one,
who really knows the patient. To tel! an individual all one's darkest se-
crets, all one's illicit thoughts, one's vanities, one's sorrows, one's pas-
sions and still be fully accepted by that person is enormously
affirmative.
   Earlier I said, "Psychotherapy is a cyclical process from isolation into
relationship." It is cyclical because the patient, in terror of existential
isolation, relates deeply and meaningfully to the therapist and then,
strengthened by this encounter, is led back again to a confrontation
with existential isolation. The therapist, out of the depth of relation-
ship, helps the patient to face isolation and to apprehend his solitary
responsibility for his own life-that it is the patient who has created
his life predicament and that, alas, it is the patient, and no one else,
who can alter it.
   The therapist leads the patient back to isolation in yet another way.
Earlier I stressed that one priceless thing the patient learns in therapy
is the limits of relationship. One learns what one can get from others
but, perhaps even more important, one learns what one cannot get from
406


9 I Existential Isolation and Psychotherapy
others. As patient and therapist encounter one another on a human
level, the former's illusions inevitably suffer. The ultimate rescuer is
seen in the full light of day as only another person after all. It is an iso-
lating moment but also, as Kenneth Fisher states, an illuminating one
"when the pilgrim chances to think: maybe no one knows-perhaps
we are all pilgrims." 26 At the very least the patient is liberated from
searching in the wrong place. Optimally he or she learns from the full-
ness of the encounter that patient and therapist and everyone else are
brethren in their humanness and their irrevocable isolation.
THE IDEAL THERAPIST-PATIENT RELATIONSHIP
   If it is the therapist's primary task to relate deeply and fully to the
patient, does then the therapist form an 1-Thou relationship with each
patient? Does the therapist "love" (in Maslow or Fromm's sense) the
patient? Is there a difference between a therapist and a true friend?
   It is hard for a therapist to read (or to write) these questions without
a certain uneasiness. "Squirm" is the word that springs to mind. There
is an inescapable dissonance in the world of the therapist: no amount
of polishing and lubricating make concepts like "friendship," "love,"
and "1-Thou" fit comfortably with other concepts like "fifty-minute
sessions," "sixty-five dollars an hour," "case conferences," and "third-
party payments." This incongruity is built into the therapist's, and the
patient's, "situation" and cannot be denied or ignored.
   There is one major aspect of a loving friendship or an 1-Thou rela-
tionship which is perforce different in the therapist-patient relation-
ship-reciprocity. The patient comes to the therapist for help. The
therapist does not come to the patient. The therapist should have moti-
vation, inclination, and ability to experience the patient as a person as
fully as possible. The patient, by definition, has impaired ability to ex-
perience the other person fully and, furthermore, has another motive
entirely-relief of suffering. Thus, the therapist has what Buber calls a
"detached presence": the therapist is able to be in two places at once-
at his or her own side and at the patient's side. "The therapist is able to
be where he himself is and where the patient is; the patient cannot be
but where he is." 27
   The therapist is interested in the "you" of the patient, not only the
"you" that is present but the potential dormant "you." The therapist
uses his or her intuitive sense of openness and closeness to the patient
as a guide, seeking always to deepen the relationship. The patient at
the onset of therapy has no ken of a reciprocal attitude toward the
therapist. The patient may ask or think questions about the therapist,
                                                                         407


                                                   III I ISOLATION
but these inquiries are generally not in the service of reaching out to
"know" or to bring out the full potential of the therapist, but rather to
establish the latter's credentials or to ascertain whether he is going to
fill the patient's needs. Occasionally the patient's questions are part of
a struggle for control in the relationship: the patient may feel less vul-
nerable in revealing himself or herself if the therapist is willing to self-
disclose also.
   Carlos Sequin in Love and Psychotherapt8 describes the therapist-
patient relationship as a special form of love: "psychotherapeutic eros."
This form of love has several distinctive features. It is, as I have already
indicated, nonreciprocal. The lack of reciprocity, I should note, is not
fixed; as therapy proceeds, the improving patient becomes increasingly
aware and increasingly caring (that is, need-free caring) about the per-
son of the therapist. Psychotherapeutic eros is indestructible or, as Carl
Rogers put it, "non-conditional." Other kinds of love can be eroded. A
lover will ultimately cease to love when his or her love is not returned.
Friends will part when they no longer have a great deal in common.
Many circumstances exist that may result in estrangement between
parent and child, teacher and student, worshiper and deity. But the ma-
ture therapist will care despite rebelliousness, narcissism, depression,
hostility, and mendacity. In fact, one might say that the therapist cares
 because of these traits, since they reflect how much the individual needs
 to be cared for.
   Another aspect of psychotherapeutic eros is that it implies a genuine
caring for the person of the patient. In Sequin's29 words, "it is not a 'hu-
manitarian' love that the doctor should feel for the sick man, qua sick
man. Rather, he should have an authentic feeling of love for the par-
ticular individual who is before him, who is this man and not another,
who is not a 'sick man,' but rather a man." Fromm, Maslow, and Buber
all stressed that true caring for another means to care about the other's
growth and to bring something to life in the other. The therapist must
 have this attitude toward the patient. The therapist's raison d'etre is to
be midwife to the birth of the patient's yet unlived life.
    The idea of "bringing to life" something in the other provides an im-
 portant procedural strategy for the therapist. Buber distinguishes two
 basic modes of affecting another's attitude toward life. 30 Either one tries
 to impose one's attitude and opinions upon another (and in such a way
 that the other deems them to be his or her own views), or one attempts
 to help another discover his or her own dispositions and experience his
 or her own "actualizing forces." The first approach Buber terms "impo-
 sition" and is the way of the propagandist. The second approach is
408


9 I Existential Isolation and Psychotherapy
"unfolding" and is the way of the educator and the therapist. Unfold-
 ing implies that one uncovers what was there all along. The very term
"unfolding" has rich connotations and stands in sharp contrast to other
terms depicting the therapeutic process-for example, "reconstruc-
 tion," "decondition," "behavioral shaping," "reparenting."
    One helps the other unfold not by instruction but by "meeting," by
 "existential communication." 31 The therapist is not a director, not a
shaper, but is instead a "possibilitator." 32 Heidegger, in analogous fash-
 ion, speaks of two different modes of caring or "solicitude." .. One can
"leap in" for another-a mode of relating similar to "imposition" -and
 thus relieve another of the anxiety of facing existence (and, in so do-
 ing, limit the other to inauthentic existence). Or one can "leap ahead"
 (a not wholly satisfying term) and "liberate" the other by confronting
 the other with his or her existential situation.
   In summary, the therapist relates to the patient in a genuine caring
fashion and strives to achieve moments of authentic encounter. The
therapist should be selfless in this endeavor-that is, concerned with
the patient's growth and not with his or her personal needs. The thera-
pist's caring should be indestructible and not dependent upon recipro-
cal caring by the patient. The therapist should be able to be both with
himself or herself and with the patient and should thus be able, in car-
ing, to enter the patient's world and to experience it as the patient ex-
periences it. This requires the therapist to approach the patient without
presuppositions, to focus on the project of sharing the patient's experi-
ence without rushing in to judge or stereotype the patient.
   Many of these aspects of the therapeutic relationship have been de-
scribed by Rogers and his co-workers in their triad of therapist charac-
teristics-empathy, genuineness, and positive, unconditional regard;
and considerable research evidence indicates that these characteristics
facilitate positive therapy outcome. My chief concern about this charac-
terization of therapist behavior is that others-despite Rogers's empha-
sis that the relationship must be genuine and deeply personalt-often
present it as a technique, as something the therapist does in therapy.
Accordingly, there are technical manuals that teach student therapists
methods of conveying empathy, genuineness, and positive regard. To
   • Heidegger distinguishes caring for things ("concern") and caring for other daseins-
that is, constituting beings ("solicitude"). 33
   t Rogers was explicit about this point in a remarkable conversation with Buber, which
indicates that these two seminal thinkers were in close agreement about the preferred
nature of the therapist-patient relationship."
                                                                                    409


                                                   III I ISOLATION
an existential therapist, when "technique" is made paramount, every-
thing is lost because the very essence of the authentic relationship is
that one does not manipulate but turns toward another with one's
whole being.
    Diagnosis. Many therapists have difficulty relating authentically to
patients because of presuppositions and stereotypes. The training of
therapists emphasizes diagnosis and classification; they are taught to
objectify patients, to arrive at an APA(American Psychiatric Association)
code number that pins a patient like a specimen to an admission work-
up or an insurance form. And, indeed, no responsible therapist can
deny there is a place for diagnostic evaluation. For example, one needs
to ascertain whether the patient has some organic illness or toxic condi-
tion that is affecting his or her psychological state. Or one needs to as-
certain whether the patient is suffering from severe affective disorder
of biochemical etiology (for example, endogenous depression or mani-
depressive diathesis) which requires pharmacological treatment.
    Even if a condition is primarily functional, the therapist needs to
make other crude determinations. Is the patient's condition of such se-
verity (for example, severe sociopathic character disturbance or well-
systematized paranoid schizophrenia) that there is little likelihood of
his or her benefiting from psychotherapy? For obvious reasons, the pa-
tient's destructive tendencies (to self and others) must be ascertained.
Even beyond that, the therapist can make determinations about a pa-
tient's fragility and ability to tolerate closeness which will provide im-
portant guidelines for the pace of therapy.
    Beyond these relatively crude determinations which serve the func-
tion of initial triage, further and "finer" diagnostic discriminations not
only offer little help to the therapist but often interfere with the forma-
tion of relationship. Intricate psychoanalytic diagnostic formulations
about specific psychosexual dynamic organization are of little help to
therapy and, to the extent to which they impede genuine listening,
constitute a hindrance. Although some or most "hysterical personal-
 ities," to take one example, exhibit certain specific behavioral patterns
and are plagued by certain common dynamic conflicts, not all do so.
The standard diagnostic formulation tells the therapist nothing about
 the unique person he or she is encountering; and there is substantial
 evidence that diagnostic labels impede or distort listening. 35 Too often
 diagnostic categorization is a stimulating intellectual exercise whose
 sole function is to provide the therapist with a sense of order and mas-
 tery. The major task of the maturing therapist is to learn to tolerate un-
 certainty. What is required is a major shift in perspective: rather than
410


9 I Existential Isolation and Psychotherapy
strive to order the interview "material" into an intellectually coherent
framework, the therapist must strive toward authentic engagement.
   Therapist Self-disclosure. A therapist who is to know a patient must
do more than observe and listen; he or she must fully experience the
patient. But full experience of the other requires that one open oneself
up to the other; if one engages the other in an open and honest fash-
ion, one experiences the other as the other is responding to that
engagement.
   There is no way around the conclusion that the therapist who is to
relate to the patient must disclose himself or herself as a person. The
effective therapist cannot remain detached, passive, and hidden. Thera-
pist self-disclosure is integral to the therapeutic process. But how much
of self does the therapist disclose? Personal life problems? All feelings
toward the patient? Boredom? Fatigue? Flatulence? Clever therapeutic
strategies? Is there, in this regard, no difference between a therapist
and a dose friend?
   Vexing problems indeed! Problems that in the first several decades
of psychotherapeutic practice were never confronted, since it had been
settled early in the analytic movement that therapists should maintain
emotional distance and objectivity much as a surgeon dispassionately
studies an ailing organ. Patients will develop strong feelings for thera-
pists, warned Freud, but therapists must be on guard and suppress
tender feelings. Therapists must realize that a patient's powerful feel-
ings are "an unavoidable consequence of a medical situation, like the
exposure of a patient's body or the imparting of a vital secret." 36
   Why should a dispassionate role for the therapist be so strictly pre-
scribed? First, Freud suggested that a therapist who has ceased to be
"objective" will lose control of the situation and be swept along by
what a patient wishes rather than by what a patient requires:
       The patient would achieve her aim but the doctor would never achieve
       his. What would happen to the doctor and the patient would only be
       what happened, according to the amusing anecdote, to the pastor and
       the insurance agent. The insurance agent, a free-thinker, lay at the point
       of death and his relatives insisted on bringing in a man of God to con-
       vert him before he died. The interview lasted so long that those who
       were waiting outside began to have hopes. At last the door of the sick-
       chamber opened. The free-thinker had not been converted; but the pas-
       tor went away insured. 37
   So, in Freud's view, if therapists open themselves up to patients and
involve themselves in normal human intercourse, they will sacrifice
objectivity and, hence, effectiveness. A second, more pervasive argu-
                                                                              411


                                                        III I ISOLATION
ment for therapist opacity is grounded in the view that transference is
the linchpin of psychotherapy. Freud believed, and the great majority
of present-day psychoanalysts still believe, that analysis of transference
is the paramount task of the therapist. As I discussed earlier, to Freud
that transference was a living representation of what a patient had
experienced early in life-in ages too ancient to be fully accessible to
memory. Thus, by observing, understanding, and helping the patient
to "work through" transference (that is, to experience it, to recognize
its inappropriateness to the current situation, and to discover the infan-
tile sources of the transferential feeling) the therapist uncovers the
deepest strata of the individual's life experience.
   Given the key role of transference, it follows that the therapist
should facilitate its development. The less the therapist's real self ap-
pears, the more readily does the patient transfer onto him feelings that
belong elsewhere. This is, of course, the rationale for the traditional
"blank screen" role of the therapist and for the peculiar seating ar-
rangement of the psychoanalytic session where the analyst remains be-
hind the couch out of the patient's range of vision. This prescription
against therapist self-disclosure paved the way for two generations of
psychotherapy technique that argued against an authentic encounter
between therapist and patient and insisted that the therapist's primary
function-indeed, sole function-was interpretation.
   Even some early theorists, however, dissented with this view of the
therapist's role. Sandor Ferenczi, one of Freud's first and most loyal
disciples, argued that the detached, omniscient posture of the therapist
interfered with therapeutic effectiveness. Ferenczi, especially during
his later years, openly acknowledged to patients his fallibility. For ex-
ample, in response to a justified criticism, he felt comfortable in saying,
"I think you may have touched upon an area in which I am not entirely
free myself. Perhaps you can help me see what's wrong with me." 38
   For the most part, however, it was not until the 1950s when the issue
of the real-that is, the "non transference" -relationship was discussed
in psychiatric literature. (Ralph Greenson and Milton Wexler's exten-
sive review39 cites only two studies before 1950.) In 1954, in an infor-
mal discussion of transference, Anna Freud commented:
       With due respect for the necessary strictest handling and interpretation
       of the transference, I feel still that we should leave room somewhere for
       the realization that analyst and patient are also two real people of equal
       adult status, in a real personal relationship to each other. I wonder
       whether our-at times complete-neglect of this side of the matter is not
       responsible for some of the hostile reactions which we get from our pa-
412


 9 I Existential Isolation and Psychotherapy
         tients and which we are apt to ascribe to "true transference" only. But
         these are technically subversive thoughts and ought to be handled with
         care. 40
Greenson and Wexler in 1969 gave some indication of the persistence
of the traditional analytic view on this issue:
         Although one no longer hears elaborate debates in analytic circles as to
         whether it is a mortal technical sin to offer a Kleenex to a patient weep-
         ing over the recent death of a parent, it is still highly suspect to do any-
         thing which resembles being kind to the patient."
Although Greenson and Wexler argued for a more human therapist-
patient relationship, I believe that they used the wrong reasons. In
their discussion of the drawbacks to excessive therapist detachment,
they said:
         Perhaps we should be more aware of the fact that persistent anonymity
         and prolonged affective atherosclerosis can also be seductive, but gener-
         ally in the direction of inviting an irreversible and uninterpretable hos-
         tile transference and alienation. 42
Thus, these analysts argued for greater therapist involvement out of
technical considerations: to keep the transference from becoming un-
workable and to facilitate its analysis.,.
   To summarize, a singular focus on transference impedes therapy be-
cause it precludes an authentic therapist-patient relationship. First, it
negates the reality of the relationship by considering the relationship
solely as a key to understanding other more important relationships.
Secondly, it provides therapists with a rationale for personal conceal-
ment-a concealment that interferes with the ability to relate in a
genuine fashion with patients. Does this mean that therapists who
faithfully maintain a detached, objectifying, "interpretation-only" pos-
ture toward patients are ineffective or even destructive? I believe that,
fortunately, such therapists and such courses of therapy are exceeding-
   • Incidentally the previous quotation contains the curious phrase that "prolonged af-
fective atherosclerosis can also be seductive." I assume what is meant is that it is easier
and requires less investment of energy for therapists to remain emotionally uninvolved.
Possibly so, but therapists pay a terrible price as they themselves ultimately become
deadened. Another professional hazard for therapists consists of using encounters with
patients to avoid confronting and integrating their own isolation. Without such an inte-
gration some therapists never develop the autonomy to engage in gratifying and endur-
ing love relationships instead, their personal lives become a staccato of intense but tran-
sient fifty-minute encounters.
                                                                                       413


                                                   III I ISOLATION
ly rare. Here lies the importance of the "throw-ins" in therapy: thera-
pists despite themselves and often unbeknownst to themselves reach
out in a human manner in off-the-record moments.
   What are other objections to therapist self-disclosure? Some thera-
pists fear that if they open the door a little, patients will force it wider
and demand more self-revelation. My personal experience is that this
fear is unwarranted. I feel it is often important to reveal my immediate
here-and-now feelings to the patient. I rarely find it necessary or par-
ticularly helpful to reveal many details of my personal past and current
life. I have almost never found a patient whose demands escalate. The
desire of the patient is not that the therapist be stripped but that the
therapist relate to him or her as a person and be entirely present in the
immediate encounter.
   How much to reveal? What guidelines to use? It is important to keep
in mind the overriding goal-authentic relationship. One of the out-
standing characteristics of "psychotherapeutic eros" is the care for the
other's becoming. Rollo May suggests the Greek term agape or the Latin
caritas-a love that is devoted to the welfare of the other. What is im-
portant, then, is that therapist self-disclosure be in the service of the
growth of the patient. Self-expression on the part of the therapist, or
total honesty, or spontaneity, may each be a virtue in itself, but each is
secondary to the overriding presence of agape. Therefore, it follows
that therapists must keep some things to themselves, that they say
nothing that may be destructive to a patient, that they respect the prin-
ciple of timing and attend to the pace of therapy, to what a patient is or
is not ready to hear.
   The principle of self-restraint applies, incidentally, when we consid-
er another objection to the therapist's involving himself or herself as a
real person with the patient: loss of therapist objectivity, with resulting
excesses and irresponsible behavior. Perhaps the most flagrant excess is
the therapist who, as a "real person," becomes sexually involved with a
patient. I have seen many patients who have had some prior sexual in-
volvement with a therapist. My impression is that the experience is al-
ways destructive for the patient, and that invariably the therapist has
violated the principle of agape-love for the being (and the becoming)
of the other. Such therapists heeded not their patients' needs but their
own and offered wretchedly transparent rationalizations-such as a
patient's need for sexual affirmation. I have yet to hear of a therapist
becoming sexually involved with one who might really need sexual af-
firmation-that is, with one who is remarkably unattractive, physically
deformed, or surgically mutilated.
414


9 I Existential Isolation and Psychotherapy
   Another reason for the therapist to remain hidden is the fear that
self-disclosure would lay bare some of those incongruities in the ther-
apy situation I spoke of earlier: fee for service, the fifty-minute hour,
the therapist's packed schedule. Will the patient ask, "Do you love
me?" "If you really care for me, would you see me if I had no money?"
"Is therapy really a purchased relationship?" It is true that these ques-
tions veer perilously close to that ultimate secret of the psychotherapist
which is that the encounter with the patient plays a relatively small
role in the therapist's overall life. As in Tom Stoppard's play Rosen-
crantz and Guildenstern Are Dead, a key figure in one drama becomes a
shadow in the wings as the therapist moves immediately onto the stage
of another drama. Indeed, this denial of specialness is one of the cruel
truths and poorly kept secrets of therapy: the patient has one therapist;
the therapist many patients. The therapist is far more important to the
patient than the patient to the therapist. To my mind there is only one
response that therapists can make to such questions from patients: that
when the therapist is with the patient, he or she is fully with the pa-
tient; the therapist strives to give his or her entire presence to the oth-
er. That is why earlier I stressed the importance of the immediate mo-
ment in an encounter. At the same time the therapist must know that,
though the aim must be full encounter, he or she cannot continually
relate at that level (recall Buber: "One cannot live in the pure present
[that is, in the 1-Thou], it would consume us" 43 ) but must repeatedly
during the hour bring himself or herself back to full engagement in
the present moment.
   I listen to a woman patient. She rambles on and on. She seems unat-
tractive in every sense of the word-physically, intellectually, emo-
tionally. She is irritating. She has many off-putting gestures. She is not
talking to me; she is talking in front of me. Yet how can she talk to me
if I am not here? My thoughts wander. My head groans. What time is
it? How much longer to go? I suddenly rebuke myself. I give my mind
a shake. Whenever I think of how much time remains in the hour, I
know I am failing my patient. I try then to touch her with my thoughts.
I try to understand why I avoid her. What is her world like at this mo-
ment? How is she experiencing the hour? How is she experiencing me?
I ask her these very questions. I tell her that I have felt distant from her
for the last several minutes. Has she felt the same way? We talk about
that together and try to figure out why we lost contact with one an-
other. Suddenly we are very dose. She is no longer unattractive. I have
much compassion for her person, for what she is, for what she might
yet be. The clock races; the hour ends too soon.
                                                                        415


  ·PART IV
Meaninglessness


                CHAPTER 10
              Meaninglessness
      Imagine a happy group of morons who are engaged in work. They are
      carrying bricks in an open field. As soon as they have stacked all the
      bricks at one end of the field, they proceed to transport them to the op-
      posite end. This continues without stop and everyday of every year they
      are busy doing the same thing. One day one of the morons stops long
      enough to ask himself what he is doing. He wonders what purpose there
      is in carrying the bricks. And from that instant on he is not quite as con-
      tent with his occupation as he had been before.
         I am the moron who wonders why he is carrying the bricks.'
Lus       SUICIDE NOTE, the,e last woW. written by a d6pairing ooul
who killed himself because he saw no meaning in life, serve as a stark
introduction to a question that is, indeed, a matter of life and death.
  The question takes many forms: What is the meaning of life? What is
the meaning of my life? Why do we live? Why were we put here? What
do we live for? What shall we live by? If we must die, if nothing en-
dures, then what sense does anything make?
  Few individuals were ever as tormented by such questions as was
Leo Tolstoy, who for much of a long life grappled with meaningless-
ness. His experience (from My Confession, an autobiographical frag-
ment) will launch us on our way:
      Five years ago a strange state of mind began to grow upon me: I had mo-
      ments of perplexity, of a stoppage, as it were, of life, as if I did not know
                                                                                419


                                       IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
       how I was to live, what I was to do .... These stoppages of life always
       presented themselves to me with the same question: "why?" and "what
       for?" ... These questions demanded an answer with greater and greater
       persistence and, like dots, grouped themselves into one black spot. 2
   During this crisis of meaning or, as he termed it, "life arrest," Tolstoy
questioned the meaning of everything he did. What was the point, he
asked, of managing his estate, of educating his son? "What for? I now
have six thousand desyatins in the province of Samara, and three hun-
dred horses-what then?" 3 Indeed, he wondered why he should write:
"Well, what if I should be more famous than Gogol, Pushkin, Shake-
speare, Moliere,-than all the writers in the world-well, and what
then? I could find no reply. Such questions demand an immediate an-
swer; without one it is impossible to live. Yet answer there was none."'
   With the dissolution of meaning, Tolstoy experienced a dissolution
of the foundations on which his life rested: "I felt that the ground on
which I stood was crumbling, that there was nothing for me to stand
on, that what I had been living for was nothing, that I had no reason
for living .... The truth was, that life was meaningless. Every day of
life, every step in it, brought me nearer the precipice and I saw clearly
that there was nothing but ruin. 5
   At age fifty Tolstoy veered close to suicide:
       The question, which in my fiftieth year had brought me to the notion of
       suicide, was the simplest of all questions, lying in the soul of every man
       from the undeveloped child to wisest sage: "What will come from what I
       am doing now, and may do tomorrow. What will come from my whole
       life?" otherwise expressed-"Why should I live? Why should I wish for
       anything? Why should I do anything?" Again, in other words: "Is there
       any meaning in my life which will not be destroyed by the inevitable
       death awaiting me?" 6
   Tolstoy is joined by a legion of others who have experienced a crisis
of meaning, a tormented "arrest of life." Albert Camus, to cite another
example, held that the only serious philosophical question is whether
to go on living once the meaninglessness of human life is fully
grasped. He stated, "I have seen many people die because life for them
was not worth living. From this I conclude that the question of life's
meaning is the most urgent question of all." 7
   How often do patients with Tolstoy's malady seek therapy? Though
no rigorous and comprehensive statistical studies exist, many experi-
enced clinicians who are "tuned in" to the problem of meaninglessness
state that the clinical syndrome is very common. C. G. Jung, for exam-
420


10 I Meaninglessness
ple, felt that meaninglessness inhibited fullness of life and was "there-
fore equivalent to illness." 8 He wrote: "Absence of meaning in life
plays a crucial role in the etiology of neurosis. A neurosis must be un-
derstood, ultimately, as a suffering of a soul which has not discovered
its meaning .... About a third of my cases are not suffering from any
clinically definable neurosis but from the senselessness and aimless-
ness of their lives." 9
   Viktor Frankl states that 20 percent of the neuroses he encounters in
clinical practice are "noogenic" in origin-that is, they derive from a
lack of meaning in life. Frankl's conclusions are based on his own clini-
cal impressions and upon statistical studies which unfortunately re-
main unpublished. 10 A meaninglessness crisis which has not yet crys-
tallized into a discrete neurotic symptomatic picture (an "existential
crisis") is even more common, occurring, according to Frankl, in over
50 percent of his patients in a Viennese hospital. Furthermore, FrankL
who has devoted his career to a study of an existential approach to
therapy, has apparently concluded that the lack of meaning is the para-
mount existential stress. To him, existential neurosis is synonymous
with a crisis of meaninglessness.
   Other psychotherapists share that view. Salvatore Maddi, for exam-
ple, in his splendid essay on the search for meaning, states that "exis-
tential sickness" stems from "a comprehensive failure in the search for
meaning in life." 11 Maddi describes an "existential neurosis" in which
the cognitive component is "meaninglessness, or a chronic inability to
believe in the truth, importance, usefulness or interest value of any of
the things one is engaged in or can imagine doing." 12 Benjamin Wol-
man defines existential neurosis in the same manner: "Failure to find
meaning in life, the feeling that one has nothing to live for, nothing to
struggle for, nothing to hope for ... unable to find any goal or direc-
tion in life, the feeling that though individuals perspire in their work,
they have nothing to aspire to." 13 Nicholas Hobbs agrees: "Contempo-
rary culture often produces a kind of neuroses different from that de-
scribed by Freud. Contemporary neuroses are characterized not so
much by repression and conversion ... not by lack of insight but lack
of a sense of purpose, of meaning in life." 14
   Although such clinical impressions do not constitute firm evidence,
certainly they suggest that the problem of meaning in life is a signifi-
cant one that the therapist must confront frequently in everyday clini-
cal work. Psychotherapy is a child of the Enlightenment. At bottom it
always embraces the goal of unflinching self-exploration. The therapist
must forthrightly accept and examine fundamental questions; and the
                                                                      421


                                   IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
question of meaning, that most perplexing and insoluble question of
all, must not be denied in therapy. It will not do to inattend selectively
to it, to shrink away from it, or to transform it into some lesser but
more manageable question. But where in professional training curricu-
lums does the therapist learn about the development of a sense of life
meaning, about the psychopathology of meaninglessness, or about psy-
chotherapeutic strategies available to assist patients in a crisis of
meaning?
   A small cohort of therapists have addressed these questions in infor-
mal works or in literature peripheral to mainstream therapeutic theory
and practice. This chapter will place these neglected theorists on center
stage and supplement their ranks with those philosophers and artists
whose speculations on meaning in life have clinical relevance. A satis-
fying response to the riddle of life's meaning has throughout written
history eluded the grasp of every great thinker. It will come as no sur-
prise to anyone that these pages contain neither a solution nor a whol-
ly satisfactory synthesis of the many attempted solutions. What I shall
attempt to do is raise the therapist's consciousness to the issue of life
meaning, and to survey the major approaches taken by others. It is my
hope that the therapist who is fortified with knowledge about tested
and serviceable trails through the morass of meaninglessness will act as
an informed and creative guide to the patient suffering a crisis of
meaning.
                      The Problem of Meaning
The dilemma facing us is that two propositions, both true, seem unal-
terably opposed:
   1. The human being seems to require meaning. To live without
meaning, goals, values, or ideals seems to provoke, as we have seen,
considerable distress. In severe form it may lead to the decision to end
one's life. Frankl noted that in the concentration camp the individual
with no sense of meaning was unlikely to survive. As I shall discuss
shortly, individuals facing death are able to live "better" lives, live
with fullness and zest, if they are possessed of a sense of purpose. We
apparently need absolutes-firm ideals to which we can aspire and
guidelines by which to steer our lives.
422


10 I Meaninglessness
   2. Yet the existential concept of freedom described in chapters 6 and
7 posits that the only true absolute is that there are no absolutes. An ex-
istential position holds that the world is contingent-that is, every-
thing that is could as well have been otherwise; that human beings
constitute themselves, their world, and their situation within that
world; that there exists no "meaning," no grand design in the universe,
no guidelines for living other than those the individual creates.
   The problem, then, in most rudimentary form is, How does a being
who needs meaning find meaning in a universe that has no meaning?
                            Meanings of Life
DEFINITIONS
   "Meaning" and "purpose" have different connotations. "Meaning"
refers to sense, or coherence. It is a general term for what is intended to
be expressed by something. A search for meaning implies a search for
coherence. "Purpose" ref~rs to intention, aim, function. When we in-
quire about the purpose of something, we are asking about its role or
function: What does it do? To what end?
   In conventional usage, however, "purpose" of life and "meaning" of
life are used interchangeably, and I shall treat them accordingly as syn-
onyms. "Significance" is another closely related term. Used in one
sense, "significance" has the same implication as "meaning"; another
sense confuses since it also refers to "importance" or "consequence."
   What is the meaning of life? is an inquiry about cosmic meaning, about
whether life in general or at least human life fits into some overall co-
herent pattern. What is the meaning of my life? is a different inquiry
and refers to what some philosophers term "terrestrial meaning." 15
Terrestrial meaning ("the meaning of my life") embraces purpose: one
who possesses a sense of meaning experiences life as having some pur-
pose or function to be fulfilled, some overriding goal or goals to which
to apply oneself.
   Cosmic meaning implies some design existing outside of and superior
to the person and invariably refers to some magical or spiritual order-
ing of the universe. Terrestrial meaning may, as we shall see, have foun-
dations that are entirely secular-that is, one may have a personal
sense of meaning without a cosmic meaning system.
                                                                       423


                                    IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
   One who possesses a sense of cosmic meaning generally experiences
a corresponding sense of terrestrial meaning: that is, one's terrestrial
meaning consists of fulfilling or harmonizing with that cosmic mean-
ing. For example, one might think of "life" as a symphony in which
each life is assigned some instrumental part to play. (Of course, one
may believe in cosmic meaning but be unable to comprehend one's
own place in that grand design or may even feel that one has behaved
in such a way as to forfeit one's position in the cosmic plan; but such
individuals suffer less from a sense of meaninglessness than from one
of personal guilt or fallenness.)
COSMIC MEANING
   Within the Western world, the Judeo-Christian religious tradition
has offered a comprehensive meaning-schema based upon the princi-
ple that the world and human life are part of a divinely ordained plan.
Divine justice is one corollary of that postulate: life, lived properly,
will be rewarded. The individual being's meaning-in-life is divinely
ordained: it is each human being's task to ascertain and to fulfill God's
will. How is one to know that will? A fundamentalist approach holds
that God's meaning is contained in the holy word, and that a good life
may be based on a close, literal exegesis of the Scriptures. Others are
certain only that one has to have faith, that one can never know with
certainty and has to be satisfied with hints, with guesses, about God's
ordained meaning or with the thought that a mere human cannot hope
to know God's mind. "The branch," said Pascal in the seventeenth cen-
tury, "cannot hope to know the tree's meaning." 16 Viktor Frankl expli-
cates this point of view by the analogy of an ape that was used in medi-
cal research to find an effective poliomyelitis serum. 17 The ape suffered
much pain and could never, because of its cognitive limitations, discov-
er the meaning of the situation. So, too, Frankl argues, it must be with
the human being who cannot hope to know with fullness a meaning
that exists in a dimension beyond comprehension.
   Another view of cosmic meaning stresses that human life be dedi-
cated to the purpose of emulating God. God represents perfection, and
 thus the purpose of life is to strive for perfection. Of the various types
 of perfection to be sought, Aristotle (and the whole rational intellectu-
al tradition he launched) considered intellectual perfection as the ulti-
 mate. God, in Aristotelian terms, is "thought thinking itself"; and one
 approaches the deity through perfection of one's rational faculties. In
 the twelfth century Moses Maimonides in The Guide of the Perplexed de-
 scribed the four major common modes of striving toward perfection. 18
424


10 I Meaninglessness
He dismissed the first, perfection of physical possession, as imaginary
and impermanent; and the second, perfection of the body, as failing to
differentiate human from animal. The third, moral perfection, he
found praiseworthy but limited in that it served others rather than
oneself. The fourth, rational perfection, he considered to be "true hu-
man perfection," through which "man becomes man." This perfection
is the ultimate goal and permits the human being to apprehend God.
   The cosmic meaning afforded by a religious world view permits a
vast number of interpretations of individual life purpose-some doctri-
naire, some highly imaginative. In this century Jung, for example, had
a deeply committed religious outlook and believed no one can be
healed or find meaning unless one regains one's religious outlook.' 9
Jung's view of his personal life purpose was to complete God's work of
creation:
       Man is indispensable for the completion of creation; that is, in fact, he
      himself is the second creator of the world who alone has given to the
      world its objective existence-without which, unheard, unseen, silently
      eating, giving birth, dying, heads nodding through hundreds of mil-
       lions of years, it would have gone on in the profoundest night of non-
      being down to its unknown end.'"
   Jung's idea that the human being completes the work of creation and
"puts the stamp of perfection upon it," is a conclusion arrived at by
others. Earlier Hegel wrote "without the world God is not god .... God
is God only insofar as he knows himself and his self-knowledge is his
consciousness of himself in man and man's knowledge of god."" Or
the poet Rilke in this century:
      What will you do, God, if I die?
      I am your jug, what if I shatter?
      I am your drink, what if I spoil?
      I am your robe and your profession
      Losing me, you lose your meaning."
   A provocative comment by Thomas Mann echoes this thought:
"With the generation of life from the inorganic, it was man who was
ultimately intended. With him a great experiment is initiated, the fail-
ure of which would be the failure of creation itself.... Whether that be
so or not, it would be well for man to behave as if it were so." 23
   Mann's thought that "it was man who was ultimately intended"
forms the heart of the creative system of meaning posited by Pierre
Teilhard de Chardin, the twentieth-century theologian who formulat-
                                                                           425


                                           IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
ed an evolutionary synthesis in his remarkable book The Phenomenon of
Man. 24 Teilhard de Chardin suggested a cosmic coherence in his law of
"controlled complication": that life is a single unity, that the entire liv-
ing world is a "single and gigantic organism* which, with predestined
direction, enters into the evolutionary process. All of evolution is thus
an orthogenetic process and, just as factors inside a single developing
organism determine its ultimate outcome, so too do predetermined fac-
tors influence the ultimate outcome of the cosmic evolutionary pro-
cess-a process destined to end with the human being in an absolute
state of love and spiritual union.
   In Teilhard de Chardin's system each individual, by playing a role in
the shared enterprise, is provided with a personal sense of meaning:
"Although only a small fraction of those who try to scale the heights of
human achievement arrive anywhere close to the summit, it is impera-
tive that there be a multitude of climbers. Otherwise the summit may
not be reached by anybody. The individually lost and forgotten multi-
tudes have not lived in vain, provided that they, too, made the efforts
to climb." 27 Thus, there is shared, common entrance into a superhuman
realm. "The gates of the future will admit only an advance of all to-
gether, in a direction in which all together could join and achieve ful-
fillment in a spiritual renovation of the earth." 28
SECULAR PERSONAL MEANING
   Personal Meaning in the Absence of Cosmic Meaning. Human beings
are extraordinarily comforted by the belief that there is some supraor-
dinate, coherent pattern to life and that each individual has some par-
ticular role to play in that design. One is not only provided a goal and a
role but also a set of guidelines about how one should live life. Cosmic
religious views constituted a major part of the belief system in the
Western world until approximately three hundred years ago. Begin-
ning at that time these views began to suffer an onslaught both from
the burgeoning scientific attitude as well as from the Kantian question-
ing of the existence of a fixed objective reality. The more that the exis-
tence of something beyond man-either supernatural or some other
   • The idea of the world as a single organism was a world view held by many primitive
cultures and was prevalent in Western Europe until the sixteenth century. This scheme
of cosmic meaning provided a firm, serviceable sense of terrestrial meaning, since each
human being learned from birth that he or she was part of a larger unit and must con-
duct his or her life for the good of the mega-organism." Thus, in the eighteenth century
Alexander Pope could proclaim in his Essay on Man that "partial evil is for the universal
good.""
426


10 I Meaninglessness
abstract absolute-was called into doubt, the more difficult it was for
the human being to embrace a cosmic meaning system.
  But meaning systems cannot be relinquished without some substi-
tute. Perhaps we can forgo the answer to the question, Why do we live?
but it is not easy to postpone the question, How shall we live? Modern
secular humans face the task of finding some direction to life without
an external beacon. How does one proceed to construct one's own
meaning-a meaning sturdy enough to support one's life?
  Meaning in an Absurd World: Camus and Sartre. Let me begin by exam-
ining the thinking of Albert Camus and Jean-Paul Sartre, two of the
important thinkers who helped paint us into the corner of meaning-
lessness in the twentieth century. How did they deal with the question
of life meaning?
  Camus used the word "absurd" to refer to the human being's basic
position in the world-the plight of a transcendent, meaning-seeking
being who must live in a world that has no meaning. Camus stated that
we are moral creatures who demand that the world supply a basis for
moral judgment-that is, a meaning system in which is implicit a blue-
print of values. But the world does not supply one: it is entirely indif-
ferent to us. The tension between human aspiration and the world's in-
difference is what Camus referred to as the "absurd" human
condition. 29
   What then are we to do? Are there no guidelines? No values? Noth-
ing right or wrong? good or evil? If there are no absolutes, then noth-
ing is more important than anything else, and everything is a matter of
indifference. In his novels A Happy Death 30 and The Stranger, 31 Camus
portrayed individuals who live in a state of value-nihilism. Meursault,
in The Stranger, exists outside the moral world. "It's all the same to me,"
he says repeatedly. He attends his mother's funeral, copulates, works,
and kills an Arab on the beach, all in the same state of profound
indifference.
   Earlier, in his essay The Myth of Sisyphus, Camus explored the tension
between his nihilism and his ethical demands and gradually began to
forge a new, secular, humanistically based vision of personal life mean-
ing and a set of guidelines for life conduct that flow from that vision.
His new vision posits that we can construct a new life meaning by
cherishing our "nights of despair," by facing the very vortex of mean-
inglessness and arriving at a posture of heroic nihilism. A human be-
ing, Camus believed, can attain full stature only by living with dignity
in the face of absurdity. The world's indifference can be transcended
by rebellion, a prideful rebellion against one's condition. "There is
                                                                        427


                                    IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
nothing equal to the spectacle of human pride." 'There is no fate that
cannot be surmounted by scorn." 32
   Camus's ideas were further shaped by the Second World War, during
which he worked in the French Underground, and he conceived of an
authentic revolt against the absurd as a fraternal revolt-a revolt in the
name of the solidarity of humankind. In his novel The Plague, Camus
described many human reactions to plague (in the book, a literal
plague, but metaphorically the Nazi occupation of France or, beyond
that, all forms of injustice and inhumanity). 33 The character who prob-
ably best represents the author's idealized self-image is Dr. Rieux, the
tireless fighter of the plague who never fails to react with courage, vi-
tality, love, and a sense of deep empathy with the plague's many
victims.
   In summary, then, Camus started from a position of nihilism-a posi-
tion in which he despaired at the lack of meaning (and, thus, lack of
purpose and values) in the world-and soon generated, gratuitously, a
system of personal meaning-a system that encompasses several clear
values and guidelines for conduct: courage, prideful rebellion, frater-
nal solidarity, love, secular saintliness.
   Sartre, more than any other philosopher in this century, has been
uncompromising in his view of a meaningless world. His position on
the meaning of life is terse and merciless: "All existing things are born
for no reason, continue through weakness and die by accident ... It is
meaningless that we are born; it is meaningless that we die." 34 Sartre's
view of freedom (a view that I discussed in chapter 6) leaves one with-
out a sense of personal meaning and with no guidelines for conduct;
indeed, many philosophers have been highly critical of the Sartreian
philosphical system precisely because it lacks an ethical component.
Sartre's death in 1980 ended a prodigiously productive career, and his
long-promised treatise on ethics will never be written.
   However, in his fiction Sartre often portrayed individuals who dis-
cover something to live for and something to live by. Sartre's depiction
of Orestes, the hero of his play The Flies (Les Mouches), is particularly il-
lustrative.35 Orestes, reared away from Argos, journeys home to find his
sister Electra, and together they avenge the murder of their father
(Agamemnon) by killing the murderers-their mother Clytemnestra
and her husband Aegistheus. Despite Sartre's explicit statements about
life's meaninglessness, his play may be read as a pilgrimage to mean-
ing. Let me follow Orestes as he searches for values on which to base
his life. Orestes first looks for meaning and purpose in a return to
home, roots, and comradeship:
428


10 I Meaninglessness
      Try to understand I want to be a man who belongs to someplace, a man
      among comrades. Only consider. Even the slave bent beneath his load
      dropping with fatigue and staring dully at the ground and foot in front
      of him-why even that poor slave can say that he's in his town as a tree
      is in a forest or a leaf upon a tree. Argos is all around him, warm, com-
      pact, and comforting. Yes, Electra, I'd gladly be that slave and enjoy that
      feeling of drawing the city round me like a blanket and curling myself
      up in it. 36
Later he questions his own life conduct and realizes that he has always
done as they (the gods) wished in order to find peace within the status
quo.
      So that is the right thing. To live at peace-always at perfect peace. I see.
      Always to say "excuse me," and "thank you." That's what's wanted, eh?
      The right thing. Their Right Thing. 37
At this moment in the play Orestes wrenches himself away from his
previous meaning system and enters his crisis of meaninglessness:
      What a change has come on everything ... until now I felt something
      warm and living round me, like a friendly presence. That something has
      just died. What emptiness. What endless emptiness.••
Orestes, at that moment, makes the leap that Sartre made in his person-
allife-not a leap into faith (although it rests on no sounder argument
than a leap of faith) but a leap into "engagement," into action, into a
project. He says goodby to the ideals of comfort and security and pur-
sues, with crusader ferocity, his newfound purpose:
      I say there is another path-my path. Can't you see it. It starts here and
      leads down to the city. I must go down into the depths among you. For
      you are living all of you at the bottom of a pit ... Wait. Give me time to
      say farewell to all the lightness, the aery lightness that was mine ...
      Come, Electra look at our city .... It fends me off with its high walls, red
      roofs, locked doors. And yet it's mine for the taking. I'll turn into an ax
      and hew those walls asunder .... 39
Orestes's new purpose evolves quickly, and he assumes a Christlike
burden:
      Listen, all those people quaking with fear in their dark rooms-suppos-
      ing I take over all their crimes. Supposing I set out to win the name of
      "guilt-stealer" and heap on myself all their remorse.'"
                                                                              429


                                        IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
Later Orestes, in defiance of Zeus, decides to kill Aegistheus. His decla-
ration at that time indicates a clear sense of purpose: he chooses justice,
freedom, and dignity and indicates that he knows what is "right" in
life.
       What do I care for Zeus. Justice is a matter between men and I have no
       God to teach me it. It's right to stamp you out like the foul brute you are,
       and to free the people from your evil influence. It is right to restore to
       them their sense of human dignity.<~
And glad he is to have found his freedom, his mission, and his path.
Though Orestes must carry the burden of being his mother's murderer,
it is better thus than to have no mission, no meaning, to wander point-
lessly through life.
       The heavier it is to carry, the better pleased I shall be; for that burden is
       my freedom. Only yesterday I walked the earth haphazard; thousands of
       roads I tramped that brought me nowhere, for they were other men's
       roads ... Today I have one path only, and heaven knows where it leads.
       But it is my path.'"
Then Orestes finds another and, for Sartre, an important meaning-
that there is no absolute meaning, that he is alone and must create his
own meaning. To Zeus he says:
       Suddenly, out of the blue, freedom crashed down on me and swept me
       off my feet. My youth went with the wind, and I know myself alone ...
       and there was nothing left in heaven, no right or wrong, nor anyone to
       give me orders ... I am doomed to have no law but mine ... Every man
       must find his own way.'"
When he proposes to open the eyes of the townspeople, Zeus protests
that, if Orestes tears the veils from their eyes, "they will see their lives
as they are: foul and futile." But Orestes maintains that they are free,
that it is right they face their despair, and utters the famous existential
manifesto: "Human life begins on the far side of despair."''·
   One final purpose, self-realization, emerges when Orestes takes his
sister's hand to begin their journey. Electra asks,"Whither?" and Ores-
tes responds:
       Toward ourselves. Beyond the river and mountains are an Orestes and
       an Electra waiting for us, and we must make our patient way towards
       them.'5
And so Sartre-the same Sartre who says that "man is a futile passion,"
and that "it is meaningless that we are born; it is meaningless that we
430


10 I Meaninglessness
die"- arrived at a position in his fiction that clearly values the search
for meaning and even suggests paths to take in that search. These in-
clude finding a "home" and comradeship in the world, action, free-
dom, rebellion against oppression, service to others, enlightenment,
self-realization, and engagement-always and above all, engagement.
    And why are there meanings to be fulfilled? On that question Sartre
is mute. Certainly the meanings are not divinely ordained; they do not
exist "out there," for there is no God, and nothing exists "out there"
outside of man. Orestes simply says, "I want to belong," or "It is right"
to serve others, to restore dignity to man, or to embrace freedom; or ev-
ery man "must" find his own way, must journey to the fully realized
Orestes who awaits him. The terms "want to" or "it is right" or "must"
are purely arbitrary and do not constitute a firm basis for human con-
duct; yet they seem to be the best arguments Sartre could muster. He
seems to agree with Thomas Mann's pragmatic position in the passage
cited earlier: "Whether that be so or not, it would be well for man to
behave as if it were so."
   What is important for both Camus and Sartre is that human beings
recognize that one must invent one's own meaning (rather than dis-
cover God's or nature's meaning) and then commit oneself fully to ful-
filling that meaning. This requires that one be, as Gordon Allport put
it, "half-sure and whole-hearted" 46 -not an easy feat. Sartre's ethic re-
quires a leap into engagement. On this one point most Western the-
ological and atheistic existential systems agree: it is good and right to im-
merse oneself in the stream of life.
   Let me survey the secular activities that provide human beings with
a sense of life purpose. These activities are supported by the same argu-
ments that Sartre advanced for Orestes: they seem right; they seem
good; they are intrinsically satisfying and need not be justified on the
basis of any other motivation.
   Altruism. Leaving the world a better place to live in, serving others,
participation in charity (the greatest virtue of all)-these activities are
right and good and have provided life meaning for many humans.
Both Camus's Dr. Rieux and Sartre's Orestes fulfilled themselves
through service-one by nursing plague victims, and the other by be-
ing a guilt-stealing Pied Piper who opens the eyes of others to dignity,
freedom, and blessed despair.
   In my clinical work with patients dying of cancer I have been in a
particularly privileged position to observe the importance of meaning
systems to human existence. Repeatedly I have noted that those pa-
tients who experience a deep sense of meaning in their lives appear to
live more fully and to face death with less despair than those whose
                                                                          431


                                    IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
lives are devoid of meaning. (Jung commented, "Meaning makes a
great many things endurable-perhaps everything." 47 ) Though at this
juncture patients experienced several types of meaning, both religious
and secular, none seemed more important than altruism. Some clinical
cases are illustrative.
   Sal was a thirty-year-old patient who had always been vigorous and
athletic until he developed multiple myeloma, a painful disabling form
of bone cancer from which he died two years later. In some ways Sal's
last two years were the richest of his life. Though he lived in consider-
able pain and though he was encased in a full body cast (because of
multiple bone fractures), Sal found great meaning in life by being of
service to many young people. Sal toured high schools in the area
counseling teen-agers on the hazards of drug abuse and used his cancer
and his visibly deteriorating body as powerful leverage in his mission.
He was extraordinarily effective: the whole auditorium trembled when
Sal, in a wheelchair, frozen in his cast, exhorted: "You want to destroy
your body with nicotine or alcohol or heroin? You want to smash it up
in autos? You're depressed and want to throw it off the Golden Gate
bridge? Then give me your body! Let me have it! I want it! I'll take it! I
want to live!"
   Eva, a patient who died of ovarian cancer in her early fifties, had
lived an extraordinarily zestful life in which altruistic activities had al-
ways provided her with a powerful sense of life purpose. She faced her
death in the same way; and, though I feel uneasy using the phrase, her
death can only be characterized as a "good death." Almost everyone
who came into contact with Eva during the last two years of her life
was enriched by her. When she first learned of her cancer and again
when she learned of its spread and its fatal prognosis, she was plunged
into despair but quickly extricated herself by plunging into altruistic
projects. She did volunteer work on a hospital ward for terminally ill
children. She closely examined a number of charitable organizations in
order to make a reasoned decision about how to distribute her estate.
Many old friends had avoided close contact with her after she devel-
oped cancer. Eva systematically approached each one to tell them that
she understood their reason for withdrawal, that she bore no grudge,
but that still it might be helpful to them when they faced their own
death, to talk about their feelings toward her.
   Eva's last oncologist, Dr. L., was a cold, steel-spectacled man who sat
behind a desk the size of a football field and typed on Eva's medical re-
cord while he talked to her. Though Dr. L. was exceptionally skilled
technically, Eva considered changing doctors in order to find someone
432


10 I Meaninglessness
warmer and more caring. She decided instead to stay with him and to
make her final goal in life "the humanization of Dr. L." She demanded
more time from him, requested that he not type and that he listen to
her. She empathized with his position with patients: how hard it must
be to see so many of his patients die-in fact, because of his specialty,
almost all of his patients. Shortly before she died she had two dreams
which she reported both to me and to Dr. L. The first was that he was
in Israel but could not muster the resolution to visit the Holocaust mu-
seum. In the second dream she was in a hospital corridor and a group
of doctors (including Dr. L.) were walking away from her very quickly.
She ran after them and told them: "O.K. I understand that you can't
deal with my cancer. I forgive you, it's all right. It's perfectly normal
you should feel this way." Eva's perseverance won out, and eventually
she had the gratification of breaking down Dr. L's barriers and touch-
ing him in a deeply human manner.
   She was in a support group for patients with metastatic cancer and
found meaning until the end of her life in the fact that her attitude
toward her death could be of value to many other patients who might
be able to use Eva's zest for life and courageous stance toward death as
a model for their own living and dying. One of these patients, Mad-
eline Salmon, a marvelous poet, wrote this poem to be read at Eva's
memorial:
       Dear Eva,
       Whenever the wind is from the sea
       Salty and strong
       You are here.
       Remembering your zest for hilltops
       And the sturdy surf of your laughter
       Gentles my grief at your going
       And tempers the thought of my own.
   "Tempers the thought of my own" expresses beautifully an impor-
tant source of meaning for so many persons facing death. The idea of
being a model for others, especially for one's children, of helping them
to diminish or remove the terror of death can fill life with meaning un-
til the moment of death. One extends oneself into one's children and
into one's children's children and so on in the great chain of being.
Eva, of course, influenced me profoundly and, in so doing, shares in
the process by which I find my meaning by passing on her gift to my
readers.
   Altruism constitutes an important source of meaning for psychother-
                                                                      433


                                        IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
apists-and, of course, for all helping professionals-who not only in-
vest themselves in helping patients grow but also realize that one per-
son's growth can have a ripple effect whereby many others who touch
on that patient's life are benefited. This effect is most obvious when the
patient is someone who has a wide sphere of influence (teacher, physi-
cian, writer, employer, executive, personnel manager, another thera-
pist), but in truth it obtains for every patient in that one cannot in one's
everyday life avoid innumerable encounters with others. In my own
clinical work I try with every patient to make this an explicit area of in-
quiry; I examine their interpersonal contacts, both intimate and casual;
I explore with them what they want from others and what they con-
tribute to the lives of others.
    The belief that it is good to give, to be useful to others, to make the
world better for others, is a powerful source of meaning. It has deep
roots in the Judeo-Christian religious tradition and has been accepted
as an a priori truth even by those who reject the theistic component.
    Dedication to a Cause. "What man is, he has become through that
cause he has made his own." 48 Karl Jasper's words indicate another im-
portant secular source of life meaning-devotion to a cause. Will Du-
rant, the philosopher and historian, wrote a book entitled On the Mean-
ing of Life, which consists of statements by eminent men on their
notions of meaning in life. Working for some "cause" is a pervasive
theme.
    In his conclusions Durant states his personal position:
         Join a whole, work for it with all your body and mind. The meaning of
         life lies in the chance it gives us to produce, or to contribute to some-
         thing greater than ourselves. It need not be a family (although that is the
         direct and broadest road which nature in her blind wisdom has provided
         for even the simplest soul); it can be any group that can call out all the
         latent nobility of the individual, and give him a cause to work for that
         shall not be shattered by his death." 49
    Many kinds of cause may suffice: the family, the state, a political or
 religious cause, secular religions like communism and fascism, a scien-
 tific venture. But the important thing, as Durant states, is that "it must,
 if it is to give life meaning, lift the individual out of himself, and make
 him a cooperating part of a vaster scheme." 50
    "Dedication to a cause" as a source of personal meaning is complex.
 Durant's statement contains several aspects. First, there is the altruistic
 component: one finds meaning by contributing to others. Many causes
 have altruistic underpinnings-either they are dedicated toward direct
 service, or they may be more complex movements whose direction is
434


10 I Meaninglessness
ultimately utilitarian ("the greatest good for the greatest number"). It
seems important, if an activity is to supply meaning, that it "lift the in-
dividual out of himself," even though it is not explicitly altruistic. This
concept of "self-transcendence" is central to life-meaning schemas and
will be discussed shortly. When, however, Durant speaks of a cause
"that shall not be shattered by death" or of "becoming a part of some-
thing" greater than oneself," he is referring to other issues (for exam-
ple, death transcendence, the anxiety of isolation and helplessness)
rather than to meaninglessness per se.
   Creativity. Just as most of us would agree that service to others and
dedication to a cause provide a sense of meaning, so too would we
agree that a creative life is meaningful. To create something new,
something that rings with novelty or beauty and harmony is a power-
ful antidote to a sense of meaninglessness. The creation justifies itself,
it defies the question What for?, it is "its own excuse for being." It is
right that it be created, and it is right that one devotes oneself to its
creation.
   Irving Taylor suggests that creative artists who have worked with
the greatest personal handicaps and the greatest social constraints
(only think of Galileo, Nietzsche, Dostoevsky, Freud, Keats, the Bronte
sisters, Van Gogh, Kafka, Virginia Woolf) may have had faculties of
self-reflection so highly developed that they had a keener vision than
most of us of the human existential situation and the universe's cosmic
indifference. 51 Consequently, they suffered more keenly from a crisis of
meaninglessness and, with a ferocity born of desperation, plunged into
creative efforts. Beethoven said explicitly that his art kept him from
suicide. At the age of thirty-two, in despair because of his deafness, he
wrote, "Little kept me back from putting an end to my life. Art alone
held me back. Alas, it seems to be impossible for me to leave the world
before I have done all that I feel inclined to do, and thus I drag on this
miserable life." 52
   The creative path to meaning is by no means limited to the creative
artist. The act of scientific discovery is a creative act of the highest or-
der. Even bureaucracy may be approached creatively. A research scien-
tist who changed fields described the importance and the feasibility of
being creative in an administrative position.
        If you go into administration, you must believe that this is a creative ac-
        tivity in itself and that your purpose is something more than keeping
        your desk clean. You are a moderator and arbiter, and you try to deal
        equitably with a lot of different people, but you've also got to have
        ideas, and you've got to persuade people that your ideas are important
        and to see them into reality .... This is part of the excitement of it. In
                                                                              435


                                       IV / MEANINGLESSNESS
       both research and administration, the excitement and the elation is in
       the creative power. It's bringing things to pass. Now, I think administra-
       tion is more exciting than research. 63
A creative approach to teaching, to cooking, to play, to study, to book-
keeping, to gardening adds something valuable to life. Work situations
that stifle creativity and turn one into an automaton will, no matter
how high the salary scales, always generate dissatisfaction.
   A friend of mine, a woman sculptor, when asked whether she found
joy in her work pointed to another facet of creativity: self-discovery.
Her work was dictated, in part, by unconscious forces within. Each new
piece was doubly creative: the work of art in itself and the new inner
vistas illuminated by it. 54
   This expanded view of creativity was exceptionally useful to a com-
poser who sought therapy because the approach of his fifty-fifth birth-
day had impelled him to examine his life-a process that led him to
conclude that he had contributed little to his field. He had a profound
sense of purposelessness and was convinced that none of his efforts
would have any lasting value. He sought therapy to increase his pro-
fessional creativity, knowing at the same time that his talent as a com-
poser was limited. Therapy was unproductive until I expanded the con-
cept of creativity to include his entire life. He became aware of how
stifled his life was in many areas. For one thing, he had been locked
into an unsatisfying marriage for over thirty years and yet could bring
himself neither to change it nor to end it. Therapy forged ahead when
we reformulated his initial complaint into a new one: "How could he
be creative in fashioning a new type of life for himself?"
   Creativity overlaps with altruism in that many search to be creative
in order to improve the condition of the world, to discover beauty, not
only for its own sake but for the pleasure of others. Creativity may also
play a role in a love relationship: bringing something to life in the oth-
er is part of mature loving and of the creative process as well.
   The Hedonistic Solution. A philosophy professor asked members of an
undergraduate class to write their own obituaries. One segment of the
responses was characterized by such statements as:
       Here I lie, found no meaning, but life was continuously astonishing.
or:
       Shed your tears for those who have lived dying-
       Spare your tears for me for I've died living. 66
436


10 I Meaninglessness
The purpose of life is, in this view, simply to live fully, to retain one's
sense of astonishment at the miracle of life, to plunge oneself into the
natural rhythm of life, to search for pleasure in the deepest possible
sense. A recent textbook on humanistic psychology summed it up:
"Life is a gift. Take it, unwrap it, appreciate it, use it, and enjoy it." 56
   This view has a long heritage. In the Philebus, Plato presented a de-
bate about the proper goal of every human being. One view argues that
one should aim toward intelligence, knowledge, and wisdom. The op-
posing position is that pleasure is the only true goal in life. This view,
hedonism, has had many champions from the time of Eudoxus and Epi-
curus, in the third and fourth centuries B.c., through Locke and Mill, in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, until the present. The hedo-
nists can muster powerful arguments that pleasure as an end in itself is
a satisfactory and sufficient explanation for human behavior. One
makes future plans and chooses one course over another if, and only if,
says the hedonist, one thinks it will be more pleasant (or less unpleas-
ant) for oneself. The hedonistic frame of reference is formidable be-
cause it is elastic and can include each of the other meaning schemes
within its generous boundaries. Such activities as creativity, love, altru-
ism, dedication to a cause, can all be viewed as important because of
their ultimate pleasure-producing value. Even behavior that seems to
aim at pain, displeasure, or self-sacrifice may be hedonistic since one
may consider it as an investment in pleasure. This is an instance of the
pleasure principle yielding to the reality principle-to temporary dis-
comfort that will yield future dividends of pleasure.
   Self-Actualization. Another source of personal meaning is the belief
that human beings should strive to actualize themselves, that they
should dedicate themselves to realizing their inbuilt potential. (See
chapter 6 where I discuss the concept of self-actualization in the con-
text of responsibility).
   The term "self-actualization" is a modern reformulation of an an-
cient concept explicitly expressed as early as Aristotle in the fourth
century B.c. in his system of teleological causation-a doctrine of inter-
nal finality which postulates that the proper end or aim of each object
and each being is to come to fruition and to realize its own being. Thus,
the acorn is realized in the oak, and the infant in a fully actualized
adult.
   Later the Christian tradition emphasized self-perfection and offered
the figure of Christ, the man-God, as a model to be imitated by those
seeking to perfect their God-given being. The Imitation of Christ-the
                                                    a
fifteenth-century devotional work by Thomas Kempis and second
                                                                         437


                                     IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
only to the Bible in its influence on the faithful-and numerous books
on the lives of the saints provided guides for generations of practicing
Christians, especially the literate ones, into our own time.
   In today's secular world "self-actualization" is enmeshed in a hu-
manistic, individualistic framework. Sartre's Orestes sets off on a jour-
ney, not toward God but toward the potentiaL the fully actualized
Orestes awaiting within him.
   Self-actualization has particular significance for Abraham Maslow
who holds that one has within oneself proclivity toward growth and
unity of personality and a type of inherent blueprint or pattern consist-
ing of a unique set of characteristics and an automatic thrust toward ex-
pressing them. One has, according to Maslow, a hierarchy of inbuilt
motives. The most fundamental of these-from the standpoint of sur-
vival-are physiological. When these are satisfied, the individual turns
toward satisfaction of higher needs-safety and security, love and be-
longingness, identity and self-esteem. As these needs are met, then the
individual turns toward satisfying self-actualizing needs which consist
of cognitive needs-knowledge, insight, wisdom-and esthetic
needs-symmetry, congruence, integration, beauty, meditation, cre-
ativity, harmony.
   Self-actualization theorists propose an evolutionary morality. Mas-
low, for example, states "the human being is so constructed that he
presses toward fuller and fuller being and this means pressing toward
what most people would call good values, toward serenity, kindness,
courage, honesty, love, unselfishness, and goodness." 57 Maslow thus
answers the question What do we live for? by stating that we live in or-
der to fulfill our potential. He answers the trailer question What do we
live by? by claiming that the good values are, in essence, built into the
human organism and that, if one only trusts one's organismic wisdom,
one will discover them intuitively.
   Thus, Maslow takes the position that actualization is a natural pro-
cess, the basic organismic process in the human being, and will take
place without the aid of any social structure. In fact, Maslow views so-
ciety as an obstruction to self-actualization because it so often forces in-
dividuals to abandon their unique personal development and to accept
ill-fitting social roles and stifling conventionality. I am reminded of an
old psychology text where I once saw two pictures, juxtaposed. One
showed children playing with one another in all the freshness and
spontaneity of childhood exuberance and innocence; the other, a
crowd of New York subway travelers with vacant stares and mottled
gray faces dangling lifelessly from the subway straps and poles. Under
the two pictures was the simple caption: "What happened?"
438


10 I Meaninglessness
   Self- Transcendence. The last two types of meaning (hedonism and
self-actualization) differ from the previous ones (altruism, dedication
to a cause, and creativity) in one important aspect. Hedonism and self-
actualization are concerned with self, whereas the others reflect some
basic craving to transcend one's self-interest and to strive toward some-
thing or someone outside or "above" oneself.
   A long tradition in Western thought counsels us not to settle for a
nonself-transcendent purpose in life. To take one example, Buber, in
his discussion of hasidic thought, notes that, though human beings
should begin with themselves (by searching their own hearts, integrat-
ing themselves, and finding their particular meaning), they should not
end with themselves. 58 It is only necessary, Buber states, to ask the
question "What for? What am I to find my particular way for? What am
I to unify my being for?" The answer is: "Not for my own sake." One
begins with oneself in order to forget oneself and to immerse oneself
into the world; one comprehends oneself in order not to be preoccu-
pied with oneself.
   "Turning" is a crucial concept in Jewish mystical tradition. If one
sins and then turns away from sin, toward the world and toward fulfill-
ment of some God-given task, one is considered uniquely enlightened,
standing above even the most pious holy man. If, on the other hand,
one continues absorbed with guilt and repentance, then one is consid-
ered to be mired in selfishness and baseness. Buber writes: "Depart
from evil and do good. You have done wrong? Then counteract it by
doing good:" 69
   Buber's essential point is that human beings have a more far-
reaching meaning than the salvation of individual souls. In fact,
through excessive preoccupation with gaining an advantageous per-
sonal place in eternity, a person may lose that place.
   Viktor Frankl arrives at a similar position and expresses strong reser-
vations about the current emphasis on self-actualization. It is his view
that excessive concern with self-expression and self-actualization
thwarts genuine meaning. He often illustrates this point with the met-
aphor of a boomerang that returns to the hunter who threw it only if it
misses its target; in the same way human beings return to self-preoccu-
pation only if they have missed the meaning that life has for them. He
illustrates the same point with the metaphor of the human eye which
sees itself or something in itself (that is, it sees some object in the lens
or in the aqueous or vitreous humor) only when it is unable to see out-
side of itself.
   The dangers of a nontranscendent posture are particularly evident in
interpersonal relationships. The more one focuses on oneself, for exam-
                                                                        439


                                       IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
ple, in sexual relationships, the less is one's ultimate satisfaction. If one
watches oneself, is concerned primarily with one's own arousal and re-
lease, one is likely to suffer sexual dysfunction. Frankl-quite correct-
ly, I believe-feels that the contemporary idealization of "self-expres-
sion" often, if made an end in itself, makes meaningful relationships
impossible. The basic stuff of a loving relationship is not free self-ex-
pression (although that may be an important ingredient) but reaching
outside of oneself and caring for the being of the other.
   Maslow uses different language to convey the same concept. In his
view, the fully actualized person (a small percentage of the population)
is not preoccupied with "self-expression." Such a person has a firm
sense of self and "cares" for others rather than uses others as a means
of self-expression or to fill a personal void. Self-actualized individuals,
according to Maslow, dedicate themselves to self-transcendent goals.
They may work on large-scale global issues-such as poverty, bigotry,
or ecology-or, on a smaller scale, on the growth of others with whom
they live.
   Self-transcendence and the life cycle. These life activities that provide
meaning are by no means mutually exclusive; most individuals derive
meaning from several of them. Furthermore, as Erik Erikson long ago
theorized 80 (a theory that has been thoroughly corroborated by the
adult life cycle research in the 1970s61 ), there is gradual evolution of
meanings throughout an individual's life cycle. Whereas in adoles-
cence and early and middle adulthood one's concerns are centered on
self as one struggles to establish a stable identity, to develop intimate
relationships, and to achieve a sense of mastery in professional endeav-
ors, in one's forties and fifties one passes (unless one fails to negotiate
an earlier developmental task) into a stage where one finds meaning in
self-transcendent ventures. Erikson defined this stage ("generativity")
as "the concern in establishing and guiding the next generation," 62 and
it may take the form of specific concerns for one's progeny or, more
broadly, in care and charity for the species.
   George Vaillant, in his splendid longitudinal study of Harvard un-
dergraduates, reported that during their forties and fifties successful
men "worried less about themselves and more about the children." 63
One representative subject stated at fifty-five: "Passing on the torch
and exposure of civilized values to children has always been of impor-
tance to me, but it has increased with each ensuing year." Another:
        The concerns I have now are much less self-centered. From 30-40 they
        had to do with too many demands or too little money, whether I could
        make it in my profession, etc. Past age 45 concerns are more philosophi-
440


10 I Meaninglessness
      cal, more long term, less personal ... I am concerned about the state of
       human relations, and especially of our society. I am concerned to teach
      others as much as I can of what I have learned.
Another: "I don't plan on leaving any big footsteps behind, but I am
becoming more insistent in my attempts to move the town to build a
new hospital, support schools, and teach kids to sing." 6•
   The emergence of self-transcendent concerns is reflected in the pro-
fessional careers of several of Vaillant's subjects. 65 One scientist had
pioneered, in his twenties, a new method of making poison gas; at fifty
he chose to research methods of reducing air pollution. Another had,
during his youth, worked for the military industrial establishment and
helped calculate the blast radius of atomic warheads; at fifty he pio-
neered a college course in humanism.
   A major longitudinal study at Berkeley, California, conducted by
Norma Haan and Jack Block compared thirty-year-old and forty-five-
year-old individuals to themselves as adolescents and arrived at similar
findings. Altruism and other self-transcendent behavior increased over
time. Individuals at forty-five were "more sympathetic, giving, produc-
tive and dependable" than they were at thirty. 66
   Much developmental research has dealt primarily with the male life
cycle and has not taken special circumstances in the lives of women
sufficiently into consideration. Recent feminist scholarship has offered
an important corrective. Middle-aged women, for example, who earlier
in their lives devoted themselves to marriage and motherhood, seek
different meanings to fulfill than their middle-aged male counterparts.
Traditionally women have been expected to meet the needs of others
before their own, to live vicariously through husbands and children,
and to play a nurturing role in society as nurses, volunteers, and pur-
veyors of charity. Altruism has been imposed upon them rather than
freely chosen. Thus, at a time when their male counterparts have
achieved worldly success and are ready to turn to altruistic consider-
ations, many middle-aged women are, for the first time in their lives,
concerned primarily with themselves rather than with others.
THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF VIKTOR FRANKL
  Self-transcendence is the cardinal feature of Viktor Frankl's ap-
proach to the question of meaning, and this is an appropriate place to
consider some of Frankl's views on meaning and psychotherapy.
  Few clinicians have made any substantial contributions to the role of
meaning in psychotherapy, and virtually none have in their published
work maintained a continued interest in this area. Viktor Frankl is the
                                                                           441


                                     IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
single exception; and from the beginning of his career, his professional
interest has focused exclusively on the role of meaning in psycho~
pathology and therapy. Frankl, a Viennese and an existentially orient~
ed psychiatrist, first used the world "logotherapy" (logos="word" or
"meaning") in the 1920s. Later he used the term "existential analysis"
as a synonym; but to avoid confusion with other existential approaches
(notably that of Ludwig Binswanger), Frankl has in recent years re~
ferred to his approach, in either a theoretical or a therapeutic context,
as "logotherapy." Although Frankl is aware of the many clinical issues
stemming from the other existential ultimate concerns, he maintains in
all his work a singular accent on meaning in life. When he speaks of
existential despair, he refers to a state of meaninglessness; and when he
speaks of therapy, he refers to the process of helping the patient find
meaning.
   Before I discuss Frankl's contributions, a few words about his meth~
ods and style of presentation are in order. Despite his prolific output
and the fact that he has, in my opinion, made an important contribu~
tion to psychotherapy theory, he has not gained the recognition he de~
serves from the academic community.
   In part this neglect may be a function of the content of Frankl's
thought which, like most contributions to existential therapy, can find
no home in the "better" academic neighborhoods. Logotherapy be~
longs neither to psychoanalytically oriented schools, nor to formal psy~
chiatry, nor to religious studies, nor to behaviorally oriented academic
psychology, nor even to the "pop" personal growth movement. (None~
theless his books have a wide general audience: his first book, Man's
Search for Meaning, sold over two million copies.)
   Furthermore, many scholars find Frankl's method offensive. His ar~
guments are often appeals to emotion; he persuades, makes ex cathedra
proclamations, and is often repetitive and strident. Furthermore,
though he claims to present a secular approach to meaning (he states
that as a physician who has taken the oath of Hippocrates, he is obliged
to develop treatment methods that apply to all patients, atheists and
devout alike), it is clear that Frankl's approach to meaning is funda~
mentally religious.
   Serious readers are often troubled by many distractions in reading
Frankl. In virtually every work there are numerous self~aggrandizing
comments: self~citations, reminders about the many universities at
which he has lectured, his many titles, the many eminent people who
endorse his approach, the number of professionals who assist him, the
occasions when medical students have broken out into unrestrained
442


10 I Meaninglessness
applause during one of his interviews, the foolish questions posed to
him and his pithy rejoinders. Works by Frankl's disciples are particu-
larly unenlightening and consist of a restatement of his remarks and an
idealization of his person.
   Still, I would urge the reader to persevere. Frankl has made a signifi-
cant contribution in placing the issue of meaning before the therapist
and in his many penetrating insights into the clinical implications of
the search for meaning.
   Frankl first presented his views on the role of meaning in psycho-
therapy in From Death Camp to Existentialism (later retitled Man's Search
for Mraning: An Introduction to Logotherapy). 67 In the first part of this
book Frankl describes his grim existence in Auschwitz from 1943-45,
and in the remainder, a system of therapy that sprang from his insight
that a continued sense of life meaning was crucial for survival in the
concentration camp. His book was written on scraps of paper he se-
questered in the camp and provided him with meaning and, thereby,
with a reason to survive. Frankl's own meaning in life has been since
that time "to help others find their meaning." 68
   Basic Assumptions. Frankl begins by taking issue with Freud's basic
laws of motivation, the homeostasis principle, which posited that the
human organism attempts unceasingly to maintain an inner equilibri-
um. The pleasure principle acts to maintain homeostasis and has as its
fundamental goal the removal of tension. The pleasure principle oper-
ates in naked, unashamed form early in life; later, as the individual ma-
tures, the workings of the pleasure principle become more obscure
when the reality principle requires delay or sublimation of
gratification.
   The problem with a theory that posits some inbuilt drive (that is, the
"drive to pleasure" or "tension reduction") is that it is ultimately and
devastatingly reductionistic. In this view man is "nothing but ..."(and
here may follow any of an infinite array of formulas). Frankl's favorite
is: "Man is nothing but a complex biochemical mechanism powered by
a combustion system which energizes computers with prodigious stor-
age facilities for retaining encoded information."69 Correspondingly,
love, or altruism, or the search for truth, or beauty, is "nothing but" the
expression of one or the other of the basic drives in duality theory.
From this reductionistic point of view, as Frankl points out, "all cultur-
al creations of humanity become actually by-products of the drive for
personal satisfaction."70
   The press toward reductionism in psychology has important implica-
tions for therapy. Human behavior is often motivated by unconscious
                                                                        443


                                           IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
forces, and it is the task of the therapist to lay bare the patient's under-
lying psychodynamics. But Frankl argues (and quite correctly, I be-
lieve) that there comes a time when the unmasking has to stop. Materi-
alism (that is, explaining the higher by the lower) is often
undermining. Peace Corps volunteers do not always, to choose one ex-
ample, elect to serve for self-serving reasons. Their desire to serve
needs no "lower" or "deeper" justification; it reflects a will toward
meaning, a reaching outside of self toward finding and fulfilling a pur-
pose in life.
   Frankl-along with many others (for example, Charlotte Buhler71
and Gordon Allpore 2 )-believes that homeostatic theory fails to ex-
plain many central aspects of human life. What the human being
needs, Frankl says, "is not a tensionless state but rather a striving and
struggling for some goal worthy of him."73 "It is a constitutive charac-
teristic of being human that it always points, and is directed, to some-
thing other than itself."• 7•
   Another major objection Frankl offers to a nontranscendent pleasure-
principle view of human motivation is that it is always self-defeating.
The more one seeks happiness, the more it will elude one. This obser-
vation (termed the "hedonistic paradox" by many professional philos-
ophers75) led Frankl to say, "Happiness ensues; it cannot be pursued."
(Alan Watts put it: "It's only when you seek it that you lose it."76 ) Plea-
sure is thus not the final goal but is a by-product of one's search for
meaning.
   Frankl calls his orientation the "third" Viennese school of
psychotherapy:
       According to logotherapy, the striving to find a meaning in one's life is
       the primary motivational force in man. That is why I speak of a "will to
       meaning" in contrast to the pleasure principle (or as we could also term
       it the "will to pleasure") on which Freudian psychoanalysis is centered,
       as well as in contrast to the "will to power" stressed by Adlerian
       psychology .77
Elsewhere he states (following a suggestion of Aaron Ungersma78 ) that
the primary motivating force in the human being undergoes a develop-
mental sequence, and that the three Viennese schools reflect this evo-
   • Frankl's position is supported by a long line of phenomenologists, beginning with
Franz Brentano and later Edmund Husser!, who discovered that consciousness is always
"intentional"; it is always directed to something outside of itself. One is always conscious
of something outside of oneself.
444


 10 I Meaninglessness
lution: "The Freudian pleasure principle is the guiding principle of the
small child, the Adlerian power principle is that of the adolescent, and
the will to meaning is the guiding principle of the mature adult." 79
Frankl is careful to distinguish between drives (for example, sexual or
aggressive) that push a person from within (or, as we generally experi-
ence it, from below) and meaning (and the values implicit in the mean-
ing system) that pulls a person from without. The difference is between
drive and strive. In our most essential being, in those characteristics
that make us human rather than animal, we are not driven but instead
actively strive for some goal. Striving, as opposed to being driven, im-
plies not only that we are oriented toward something outside of self
(that is, we are self-transcendent) but also that we are free-free to ac-
cept or to deny the goal that beckons us. "Striving" conveys a future
orientation: we are pulled by what is to be, rather than pushed by re-
lentless forces of past and present.
    Meaning is essential for life, Frankl claims. It was essential for sur-
vival at Auschwitz, and it is essential for all people at all times. He
cites a public opinion poll in France that showed that 89 percent of the
general population believed that humans need "something" for the
sake of which to live, and that 61 percent felt that there was something
for which they would be willing to die. 8° Frankl is fond of commenting
that, "though some psychiatrists state that life-meaning is nothing but
defense mechanism and reaction formations, speaking for myself I
would not be willing to live merely for my defense mechanisms and
would be even less inclined to die for my reaction formations." 81
   Three Categories of Life Meaning. Though Frankl stresses that each in-
dividual has a meaning that no one else can fulfill, these unique mean-
ings fall into three general categories: (1) what one accomplishes or
gives to the world in terms of one's creations; (2) what one takes from
the world in terms of encounters and experiences; (3) one's stand
toward suffering, toward a fate that one cannot change. 82
   These three meaning systems-creative, experiential, and attitu-
dinal-have all been touched upon in the previous discussion of var-
ious systems of personal meaning. Frankl defines creativity in conven-
tional terms-that is, as a creative work or art or a scholarly endeavor
that beckons one, and that each of us alone is uniquely equipped to ful-
fill. Frankl's sense that he, and only he, could write the book that illu-
minated the role of meaning in psychotherapy was, by his account, the
major factor (aside from pure chance) that permitted him to endure and
to survive Auschwitz. A wide array of life's activities, if approached
creatively, may imbue one with meaning. "What matters," Frankl says,
                                                                        445


                                   IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
"is not how large is the radius of your activities but how well you fill
its circle. " 83
   Frankl is less clear about the meaning derived from experience, but
in general he refers to what one derives from beauty, from truth, and
especially from love. Engagement in deep experience constitutes mean-
ing: "If someone tapped your shoulder while listening to your favorite
music, and asked you if life were meaningful, would you not," asks
Frankl, "answer Yes? The same answer would be given by the nature
lover on a mountain top, the religious person at a memorable service,
the intellectual at an inspiring lecture, the artist in front of a
masterpiece."8•
   Frankl's personal life experiences in Auschwitz demanded that he
think deeply about the relationships between meaning and suffering,
between pain and death. Survival in extreme circumstances depends
upon one's being able to find a meaning in one's suffering. In the
depth of despair in the concentration camp Frankl searched for ways to
give meaning to his suffering and to the suffering of others. He con-
cluded that only by surviving could he give meaning to his anguish.
For him, survival meant that he could complete his work, that he could
forge a valuable psychotherapeutic approach out of the horrors of his
Auschwitz experience. Some inmates wished to survive for the sake of
others, for children or a spouse who awaited them; some for the sake of
completing some unique life project; some wished to survive to tell the
world about the camps; some wished to survive for revenge. (One
thinks of the Lithuanian ghetto at Kovno whose citizens wished to stay
alive for the sake of recording all the atrocities that were perpetrated
upon them: written narrative accounts, artists' drawings of faces, uni-
form serial numbers of SS officers and men were carefully noted and
stored in an underground vault where, after the war, they were re-
trieved and used to bring the guilty to trial). At other times Frankl
found meaning in suffering by remembering another aphorism of
Nietzsche's: "That which does not kill me makes me stronger." 85 Suf-
fering can have a meaning if it changes one for the better. And finally,
even when there is no hope of escape from suffering and death, Frankl
states that there is meaning in demonstrating to others, to God, and to
oneself that one can suffer and die with dignity.
   Frankl's categories of meaning supply him with psychotherapeutic
strategies to aid the patient who is in a crisis of meaning. I shall consid-
er these contributions shortly in the discussion on therapy, but shall
now turn to the clinical implications of the loss of life meaning.
446


10 I Meaninglessness
               Loss of Meaning: Clinical Implications
OUR CHANGING CULTURE: WHERE HAVE ALL THE MEANINGS GONE?
   Many clinicians have noted that, with accelerating frequency, pa-
tients come in for therapy because of complaints associated with lack of
a sense of meaning in life. Why? What are the factors in contemporary
culture that contribute to a decreasing sense of life meaning?
   Citizens of the pre-industrial agricultural world were beset by many
life problems, but today's malady of meaninglessness does not seem to
have been one of them. Meaning was supplied then in many ways. For
one thing the religious world view supplied an answer so comprehen-
sive that the question of meaning was obscured. Furthermore, people
of earlier ages were often so preoccupied with the task of meeting oth-
er more basic survival needs, such as food and shelter, that they were
not afforded the luxury of examining their need for meaning. Indeed,
as I shall discuss later, meaninglessness is intricately interwoven with
leisure and with disengagement: the more one is engaged with the ev-
eryday process of living and surviving, the less does the issue arise.
Tolstoy, whose crisis of meaninglessness I described at the beginning
of this chapter, observed that the simple peasant on his estate seemed
relatively untroubled by fundamental doubts. Tolstoy concluded that
the peasant knew something that he did not, and, accordingly, he
sought for relief from his torment by attempting to emulate the peasant
in order to discover the latter's secret knowledge.
   Citizens of the pre-industrialized world had other meaning-provid-
ing activities in their everyday life. They lived close to the earth, felt a
part of nature, fulfilled nature's purpose in plowing the ground, sow-
ing, reaping, cooking, and naturally and unself-consciously thrusting
themselves into the future by begetting and raising children. Their ev-
eryday work was creative as they shared in the creation of life amongst
their livestock and seed and grain. They had a strong sense of belong-
ing to a larger unit; they were an integral part of a family and commu-
nity and, in that context, were provided scripts and roles. Moreover,
their work was intrinsically worthwhile. Who, after all, can challenge
the task of growing food with the question What for? Growing food is
an endeavor that is simply right beyond questioning.
   But all those meanings have vanished. A citizen of today's urban-
ized, industrialized secular world must face life sans a religiously based
cosmic meaning-system and wrenched from articulation with the natu-
ral world and the elemental chain of life. We have time, too much time,
                                                                       447


                                    IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
to ask disturbing questions. As the four~ and three~day work week loom
ahead, we must brace ourselves for increasingly frequent crises of mean~
ing. "Free" time is problematic because it thrusts freedom upon us.
   Work, what there is of it, no longer supplies meaning. Not even an
extraordinarily fertile imagination could imbue many common forms
of modern work with creative potential. The assembly line worker, for
example, not only has no creative outlet on the job but systematically
begins to consider himself or herself as a mindless cog in the factory
machinery. Furthermore, much work lacks intrinsic value. How can
the members of clerical armies performing "busy" work in vast, waste~
ful bureaucratic systems believe that their activities are worthwhile?
With the population explosion, and its exposure on the mass media,
how can the individual help but doubt that the begetting and rearing
of children is doing a favor to anyone, least of all to the planet or the
human species?
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
   How does the clinician encounter the phenomenon of meaningless~
ness in everyday clinical work? Few clinicians doubt that the com~
plaint is common: earlier in this chapter I cited comments by Jung,
Frankl, Maddi, Wolman, and Hobbs attesting to the frequency of mean~
inglessness as a clinical complaint. Unfortunately few systematic clini~
cal inquiries have been made.
   My colleagues and I conducted a project several years ago that,
though it studied only a small clinical sample, lends some support to
the claims that meaninglessness is a frequent clinical complaint. 86 The
chief problems of forty consecutive patients applying for therapy at a
psychiatric outpatient clinic were investigated in three different ways:
patient's written self~report, therapist's report, conclusions of three eli~
nicians observing a videotape of a clinical interview with each patient.
Of the forty patients, nine listed some problem (most patients compiled
a total list of three to six problems) centering around lack of meaning
(such as "lack of purpose," "need for meaningfulness in my life,"
"don't know why I'm doing what I'm doing," "drifting without a
goal," "lack of direction in my life"). The therapist and independent
raters rated five of these nine patients as having a major problem sur~
rounding meaning, but also included three additional patients (who
listed the problems of "lacks meaning in life," "purposelessness," and
"vague life goals"). Thus of forty patients, twelve (30 percent) had
some major problem involving meaning (as adjudged from self~ratings,
therapists, or independent judges).
448


10 I Meaninglessness
   Jill Gardner studied eighty-nine patients applying for therapy at an
outpatient clinic.87 The patients were asked to indicate the importance
of sixteen different reasons for entering therapy. Of the patients 68
percent rated "to seek increased meaning in life" as "moderately" or
"very" important. This item ranked ninth of the sixteen reasons and
well ahead of such items as "to change how I relate to people" and
"loneliness."
   Meaninglessness is rarely mentioned as a clinical entity because it is
generally considered to be a manifestation of some other, primary, and
more familiar clinical syndrome. Indeed, Freud once stated, "The mo-
ment a man questions the meaning of life, he is sick .... By asking this
question one is merely admitting to a store of unsatisfied libido to
which something else must have happened, a kind of fermentation
leading to sadness and depression." 88 Accordingly, meaninglessness is
considered a symptom of some more significant underlying condition,
such as chronic alcoholism, other forms of substance abuse, low self-es-
teem, depression, and identity crisis.
   But let us examine what observations have been made of the clinical
manifestations of meaninglessness. First, there is its ubiquity. I find
that virtually every patient I have worked with has either gratuitously
expressed concern about the lack of meaning in his or her life or has
readily responded to inquiries I have made about the issue.
   Existential Vacuum and Existential Neurosis. Frankl distinguishes two
stages of a meaninglessness syndrome: the existential vacuum and the
existential neurosis. The existential vacuum-or, as he sometimes terms
it, "existential frustration" -is a common phenomenon and is charac-
terized by the subjective state of boredom, apathy, and emptiness. One
feels cynical, lacks direction and questions the point of most of life's ac-
tivities. Some complain of a void and a vague discontent when the
busy week is over (the "Sunday neurosis"). Free time makes one aware
of the fact that there is nothing one wants to do. Frankl claims that exis-
tential frustration is increasing in frequency and spreading into all
parts of the world. In one study he reports an incidence of "existential
vacuum" of 40 percent for college students in Vienna and of 81 percent
for American college students. 89 In another study he reports a rapid
spread into such areas as Czechoslovakia, other Iron Curtain countries,
and Africa. 90 Alois Habinger reports a rise in the incidence of existen-
tial frustration among youngsters over a two-year period in Vienna
(1970-72)-30 to 80 percent! 91 As the method of inquiry is not reported
in any of these accounts (aside from the comment "improvised statisti-
cal survey"), we cannot take these hyperbolic data literally; but if they
                                                                        449


                                    IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
even remotely reflect the incidence of existential vacuum, they are
noteworthy.
  If the patient develops, in addition to explicit feelings of meaning-
lessness, overt clinical neurotic symptomatology, then Frankl refers to
the condition as an existential or "noogenic" neurosis. He posits a psy-
chological horror vacui: when there is a distinct (existential) vacuum, symp-
toms will rush in to fill it. The noogenic neurosis may, according to
Frankl, take any clinical neurotic form; he mentions various symptom-
atic pictures-alcoholism, depression, obsessionalism, delinquency, hy-
perinflation of sex, daredevilry. What differentiates noogenic neurosis
from conventional psychoneurosis is that the symptoms are a manifes-
tation of a thwarted will to meaning. Behavioral patterns also reflect a
crisis of meaninglessness. Modern man's dilemma, Frankl states, is that
one is not told by instinct what one must do, or any longer by tradition
what one should do. Nor does one know what one wants to do. Two
common behavioral reactions to this crisis of values are conformity (do-
ing what others do) and submission to totalitarianism (doing what others
wish).
   Crusadism, Nihilism, and Vegetativeness. Salvador Maddi suggests that
a significant amount of current psychopathology emanates from a
sense of meaninglessness. 92 (Note, however, that Maddi's clinical mate-
rial is limited/ 3 and his basic orientation is that of a macrotheoretician
and academic psychologist.) He describes three clinical forms of "exis-
tential sickness" (as he terms pervasive meaninglessness): crusadism,
nihilism, and vegetativeness.
   Crusadism (also termed "adventurousness" 9•) is characterized by a
powerful inclination to seek out and to dedicate oneself to dramatic
and important causes. These individuals are demonstrators looking for
an issue; they embrace a cause almost regardless of its content. As soon
as one cause is finished, these hard-core activists must rapidly find an-
other in order to stay one step ahead of the meaninglessness that pur-
sues them.
   The fact that the crusader searches out causes almost indiscriminately
does not, of course, imply that most or even many supporters of any
given social movement are motivated by similar factors. Nor is zeal for
social change to be regarded as a defense mechanism. But involvement
in a social movement is generally time-consuming, exhausting, and, if
it involves civil disobedience, often dangerous. When a movement's
purpose is accomplished, the participants, unlike the crusader, general-
ly return to the business of their everyday lives. Crusadism, as Maddi
describes it, is thus a reaction formation; the individual engages com-
pulsively in activities in response to a deep sense of purposelessness.
450


10 I Meaninglessness
   Nihilism is characterized by an active, pervasive proclivity to discredit
activities purported by others to have meaning. The nihilist's energy
and behavior flow from despair; he or she seeks the angry pleasure in-
volved in destruction to quote Maddi:
       He will be quick to point out that love is not altruistic but selfish, how
       philanthropy is a way of expiating guilt, that children are vicious rather
       than innocent, how leaders are vain and power-mad rather than in-
       spired by a grand vision, and how work is not productive but rather a
       thin veneer of civilization hiding the monster in us all. 96
   Nihilism is so common, Maddi suggests, that it is not even recog-
nized as a problem; in fact, it often masquerades as a highly enlight-
ened, sophisticated approach to life. He cites the novelist and film
maker Alain Robbe-Grillet, whose film, Last Year at Marienbad, contains
seemingly meaningful threads but each defies the attempts of the mo-
viegoer to discover its meaning. The film, Maddi suggests, was intend-
ed to frustrate any search for meaning in order to demonstrate the fu-
tility of believing in the meaningfulness of anything.
   The vegetative form of existential sickness is the most extreme degree
of purposelessness. One does not compulsively search for meaning in
causes; nor does one angrily lash out at meaning embraced by others.
Instead, one sinks into a severe state of aimlessness and apathy-a state
that has widespread cognitive, affective, and behavioral expressions.
The cognitive component is the chronic inability to believe in the use-
fulness or the value of any of life's endeavors. The affective tone is one
of pervasive blandness and boredom, which are punctuated by episodic
depressions. As the condition progresses, the individual settles into in-
difference, and periods of depression become less frequent. Overall be-
havioral levels are low to moderate, but even more important is the lack
of selectivity of behavior: it becomes immaterial to the person which
activities, if any, he or she pursues.
   The vegetative trend is widespread in contemporary culture. Maddi
suggests that it is clearly reflected in such artistic creations as the films
of Antonioni, T. S. Eliot's The Wasteland, Edward Albee's The Zoo Story,
Jean Genet's The Balcony. The contemporary film Easy Rider is a particu-
larly vivid example of apathy and meaninglessness.
   Individuals with a developing vegetative syndrome may seek thera-
peutic help for the associated depression and painful doubting. The
therapist may note that such a patient is not troubled with guilt or es-
teem-identity problems or with manifestations of sexual or aggressive
concerns. Instead, the patient voices such concerns as: Why bother
working all your life if everything ends in death? Why spend half your
                                                                              451


                                    IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
life going to school? Why marry? Why raise a family? Why endure any
deprivation? Aren't all values arbitrary, all goals illusionary?
   If the condition progresses unchecked, the patient sinks deeper into
indifference. He or she may withdraw from any engagement with life
by becoming a recluse, a chronic alcoholic, or a hobo or by adopting
some other analogous life pattern. Maddi suggests that many institu-
tionalized patients are in a vegetative form of meaninglessness but, be-
cause they must be labeled with some official nosological diagnosis, are
generally referred to as simple schizophrenics-a term now recognized
to be a misnomer. Some vegetative patients are diagnosed as psychoti-
cally depressed. Even though they may not show the signs and symp-
toms of depression, the assumption is made that if they are vegetative
they must be depressed. Maddi argues that at least some proportion of
institutionalized patients with these diagnoses or other makeshift la-
bels might, more appropriately, be considered existentially ill.
   Compulsive Activity. The preceding clinical forms of meaningless-
ness are not of course, observed commonly as full-blown entities but
represent a clinical paradigm. Features and varying degrees of severity
may be seen in many patients, often mingled with other clinical com-
plaints. In my experience one of the more common clinical forms of
meaninglessness is a pattern of frenetic activity that so consumes the
individual's energy that the issue of meaning is drained of its toxin.
This pattern is related to crusaderism but is broader in scope. Not only
some dramatic social cause but any compelling human activity can be
so cathected that it serves as a caricature of meaning. When the activity
has no intrinsic "goodness" or "rightness," then it sooner or later will
fail the individual. This phenomenon, which James Pike referred to as
a "false centering" of life/6 generally comes to the clinician's attention
when the vehicle of meaning has collapsed or is in obvious danger of
collapsing. Examples abound in which individuals in pursuit of mean-
ing through social position, prestige, material acquisitions, or power
suddenly are forced to question the value of these goals as life pursuits.
   Harvey, a forty-two-year-old patient provides a clinical illustration.
Harvey's original request for therapy was unusual: a quarrel with his
wife over whether to buy first-class or tourist airline tickets propelled
him into therapy. The circumstances were as follows. Harvey's father
was a middle-class, compulsively busy merchant. The whole family, in-
cluding Harvey, worked long hours six to seven days a week in the
family grocery store. Gradually the business expanded into a second
and a third store. The business constituted the universe of the family
and of Harvey as well. He subscribed to the family's work ethic and
452


 10 I Meaninglessness
considered business prosperity as his raison d'etre. His long working
hours even as a child precluded his developing important chumships
or heterosexual relationships, and at the time of graduation from high
school he had never spent a night away from home. His identity was
that of a "good boy," who never questioned, never rebelled, never
thought deeply about himself or about life.
   Following graduation from college (a business curriculum), he took
over the family business (his father had died in harness) and had a
highly successful business career. Through a variety of circumstances-
an economically brilliant marriage, an excellent and experienced part-
ner, and his own circumspect intelligence-he built up a nationwide
chain of stores which he then sold for a dazzling sum to a large corpo-
ration. At thirty he had amassed a fortune of several million 1965 dol-
lars. At this point he might have let up for a brief while, relaxed, per-
haps even thought deeply about What next? Whither? or What for?
Instead, he plunged immediately into another business enterprise,
soon was working over seventy hours a week, and was so consumed
with business concerns that his marriage was in peril. When he came
for therapy, he had plans for a third empire, since he wanted to see if
he could start a business from scratch, with little capital, no business
partners, and no outside counsel (the business equivalent of wilderness
survival).
   Harvey became aware of certain troublesome incongruities. The eco-
nomical practices of his family of origin stayed with him; and, despite
the fact that his income from interest alone was enormous, he searched
the newspaper for sales when he shopped and was perfectly willing to
drive several miles to save a few dollars on a television set.
   But it was the airline ticket caper that spurred him into taking a seri-
ous look at his goals in life. He, his wife, and another couple were
planning a vacation to the Orient. The difference between first class
and coach for the twelve-hour flight was several hundred dollars a
ticket. Harvey's wife, his friend (who incidentally worked for Harvey),
and the friend's wife all wished to fly first class. Harvey refused to
spend the extra money for a wider seat and free champagne (as he put
it); and he booked a coach ticket, while the other three, including his
wife, traveled first class! Harvey had a good sense of humor and recog-
nized the comedy of the situation; still, he was deeply troubled by the
situation and developed anxiety, insomnia, and some hypochondriacal
complaints. At this juncture he sought psychotherapy.
   In therapy the airline ticket episode became the fulcrum for a far-
ranging discussion of values. If money was to be spent lavishly for triv-
                                                                       453


                                    IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
 ial comforts, why was Harvey killing himself to make more money?
 Why devote his entire life to money? He had already more than he
could spend and had proved he could earn it. He began to question his
 basic life-long meaning system. One of the first insights Harvey ac-
quired in therapy was that he had falsely centered his life, since mate-
 rial good constituted at best a fragile sense of life meaning-one that
 would not withstand examination.
    The event that propelled Harvey into a crisis of meaning was that he
 had successfully and precociously achieved his life goal (always a dan-
 ger in a nontranscendent life-meaning schema). Other events that may
 precipitate such a crisis include a confrontation with death or some ur-
 gent (boundary) experience that confronts the individual with his or
 her existential situation and illuminates the insubstantial nature of
 many systems of meaning. Some major upheaval that suddenly uproots
 the ritual and tradition of the social order may also throw certain val-
 ues (for example, the social customs of "society") into sharp relief: one
not only stops being rewarded extrinsically for adherence to ritual but,
even more important, one becomes aware of the absolute relativity of
the values one once considered as absolutes.
   Some patients undergo a crisis of meaning as a result of psychothera-
py. As patients explore themselves deeply and open new vistas within,
old compulsive patterns are undermined and eventually decathected.
Patients who for much of their life have lived narrowly within the con-
fines of fixed repetitive patterns are faced with the freedom that their
compulsivity has guarded them from. For example, the sexually com-
pulsive patient Bruce, whom I described in chapter 5, had always filled
"free" or reflective time with sexual fantasy or pursuit. When, in the
course of successful therapy, Bruce's compulsivity weakened and then
entirely loosened its hold on him, he passed through a crisis of mean-
ing. (It was not that he had a prior, satisfying sense of meaning, but his
compulsive activity had always provided a potent antidote to meaning-
lessness-namely engagement. The problem was that content of Bruce's
compulsive engagement was so limited and restrictive that he failed to
realize many of his deeply human potentials. Consequently he had no
conscious crisis of meaning in his life, but in its place he experienced
massive existential guilt-guilt at not becoming what he had it in him
to be.)
    When Bruce first faced life sans compulsive activity, life seemed to
 him flat, colorless, zestless, and, above all, pointless. Much time in
 therapy was then devoted to an exploration of goals, to examining
 what Bruce's internal wisdom told him about what should be the basis
 for his life.
454


10 I Meaninglessness
                                  Clinical Research
    The Purpose in Life Test. In 1964, James Crumbaugh and Leonard Ma-
 holick, two psychologists greatly influenced by the work of Viktor
 Frankl, published a psychometric instrument designed to measure pur-
pose in life. 97 This questionnaire, the Purpose in Life Test (PIL), consists
of twenty items to be rated on a seven-point scale."' On each item, posi-
tion 4 is designated as "neutral," and different descriptive terms are
given for positions 1 and 7. For example the first item reads: "I am usu-
ally ... "; and position 1 is defined as "completely bored," while posi-
tion 7 is "exuberant, enthusiastic." The other nineteen items, with their
 two defined anchor points, are:
  2. Life to me seems:          (1) completely routine;      (7) always exciting.
  3. In life I have:            (1) no goals or aims at all; (7) very clear goals and
                                                             aims.
  4. My personal existence      (1) utterly meaningless,     (7) very purposeful and
     is:                        without purpose;             meaningful.
  5. Every day is:              (1) exactly the same;        (7) constantly new and
                                                             different.
  6. If I could choose, I       (1) prefer never to have     (7) like nine more lives just
     would:                     been born;                   like this one.
  7. After retiring, I would:   (1) loaf completely the rest (7) do some of the exciting
                                of my life;                  things I've always wanted
                                                             to.
  8. In achieving life goals    (1) made no progress what-   (7) progressed to complete
     I have:                    ever;                        fulfillment.
  9. My life is:                (1) empty, filled only with  (7) running over with ex-
                                despair;                     citing good things.
 10. If I should die today, I   (1) completely worthless;    (7) very worthwhile.
     would feel that my life
     has been:
 11. In thinking of my life     (1) often wonder why I ex-   (7) always see a reason for
     I:                         ist;                         my being here ..
 12. As I view the world in     (1) completely confuses      (7) fits meaningfully with
     relation to my life, the   me;                          my life.
     world:
 13. I am a:                    (1) very irresponsible per-  (7) very responsible
                                son;                         person.
 14. Concerning man's free-     (1) completely bound by      (7) absolutely free to make
     dom to make his own        limitations of heredity and  all life choices.
     choices, I believe man     environment;
     is:
   •The instrument originally consisted of two additional sections: a thirteen-item com-
pletion part and an open-ended paragraph to be written on personal ambitions and
goals; however, only the first section has been used in subsequent research."
                                                                                     455


                                         IV I MEANING LESS NESS
15. With regard to death, I  (1) unprepared and fright-  (7) prepared and unafraid.
    am:                      ened;
16. With regard to suicide,  (1) thought of it seriously (7) never given it a second
    I have:                  as a way out;               thought.
17. I regard my ability to   (1) practically none;       (7) very great.
    find a meaning, a pur-
    pose, or mission in life
    as:
18. My life is:              (1) out of my hands and     (7) in my hands and I am
                             controlled by external fac- in control of it.
                             tors;
19. Facing my daily tasks    (1) a painful and boring    (7) a source of pleasure and
    is:                      experience;                 satisfaction.
20. I have discovered:       (1) no mission or purpose   (7) clear-cut goals and a
                             in life;                    satisfying life purpose.
   The PIL test has enjoyed wide usage; over fifty Ph.D. dissertations on
purpose in life have been written which employ it as a major measur-
ing tool; but before discussing some of the results of this research, I
shall closely examine the validity of the instrument.
   First, the face content of the items deals with several different con-
cepts. Eight items (3,4,7,8,12,17,20) deal explicitly with life meaning
(purpose, mission); six items (1,2,5,6,9,19) deal with life satisfaction
(life is boring, routine, exciting, or painful); three items (13,14,18) deal
with freedom, one item (15), with fear of death; one (16), with contem-
plation of suicide; and one (10) with worthwhileness of one's life. To
my mind this conceptual confusion raises serious questions about the
validity of the instrument. Although, for example, life satisfaction or
consideration of suicide may be related to meaning in life, they are
even more obviously related to other psychological states-most nota-
bly depression. Little information has been provided by the test au-
thors about methods of item selection or of individual item behavior.
In the light of these methodological shortcomings, one reviewer sug-
gested that a single item "How meaningful is your life?" might be as
valid as the entire scale. 99
   Furthermore, the PIL is obviously loaded in social desirability (a cor-
relation coefficient of .57 is reported with the Marloew-Crowne Social
Desirability scale). 100 The PIL, as critics have pointed out/ 01 reflects cer-
tain values: for example, it assumes that responsibility acceptance is
equivalent to a positive sense of life meaning. Although this is an in-
teresting hypothesis, it is not clear that responsibility and meaning are
so related.
   Charles Garfield administered the PIL to subjects from several sub-
456


 10 I Meaninglessness
 cultures (ghetto residents, engineers, graduate students in psychology
 and religious studies, commune inhabitants) and then interviewed sub-
 jects with high, low, and intermediate scores to determine what each
 item meant to them. 102 Depending in part upon their culture, subjects
 interpreted the items in highly idiosyncratic ways. For example, on
 item 9 ("My life is: empty ... [or] running over with exciting good
 things") ghetto residents thought of empty stomachs, commune resi-
 dents viewed "empty" as associated with losing one's ego in medita-
 tion and bliss, engineers equated "empty" with dullness, and psycholo-
 gy students viewed "exciting" as not a good thing but associated it
 with agitation or nervous activity. Similar divergent responses on oth-
 er items underscored the facts that not only is the wording ambiguous
 but also that the test is highly value-laden and based on assumptions
 inherent in a Protestant work ethic, with emphasis on goal-directed be-
 havior, future orientation, activity over passivity, and the positivity of
 high levels of stimulation.
    These criticisms are substantial, indeed devastating, and have never
 been satisfactorily answered by researchers using the PIL; they all
 make it difficult for one to have a high level of confidence in the in-
 strument. Still, it is the only game in town, the only psychological in-
 strument that has been used widely to study meaninglessness in a sys-
 tematic manner. Keeping these reservations in mind, let me consider
 some of the research findings.
    First, several validity studies have indicated that the test results cor-
 relate satisfactorily with therapists' ratings of life purpose in patients
 (correlation of .38) and with ministers' ratings of parishioners (.47). 103
 By and large, patient populations have a lower PIL than have nonpa-
 tients (although some studies are equivocal; for example, one showed a
 surprisingly small difference in the scores of indigent psychiatric pa-
 tients and undergraduate students-lOS versus 106). •uo• Furthermore,
 the PIL seems to measure an independent personality variable: it does
 not correlate highly with other scales (aside from the MMPI Depres-
 sion Scale/ 05 some moderate overlap with the Srole Anomie Scale, and ,
 as I already noted, the Social Desirability Scale).
    The PIL has been employed in many clinical settings with diverse
 populations. Delinquent adolescents 106 and high school students107 who
 abuse drugs have been shown to have low PIL scores. Patients hospital-
 ized for chronic alcoholism and psychotic disorders have lower PIL
   • Note that there are twenty items, each with a seven-point scale: the highest score is,
thus, 140; the lowest, 20.
                                                                                     457


                                    IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
scores than have neurotic outpatients. 108 The mean of both hospitalized
patients and outpatients is significantly lower than in a nonpatient
sample. 109 Alcoholics have been reported as having particularly low PIL
scores. 110 Another study showed only low-normal scores for hospital-
ized alcoholics but did note that, with a month-long treatment pro-
gram, the PIL score rose significantly.m A study of outpatients in a
British clinic demonstrated that the more highly neurotic and socially
introverted patients (as measured by the Eysenck Personality Inven-
tory) have lower PIL scores. 112 Sexual adjustment was studied in a
group of normal undergraduates, and it was found that the more sex-
ually frustrated and maladjusted students have lower PIL scores. 113 One
study compared PIL scores of physically ill patients and reported an in-
teresting finding: patients who were critically ill had higher PIL scores
than had patients with a minor ailment or nonpatients. 114 The authors
speculated that these results indicate the approach of death catalyzed
the critically ill patients to come to terms with their lives, to "work
through" their doubts, and to come to some inner peace.
   The relationship between social and religious attitudes and values
(Rokeach Value Survey) has been much studied. A low PIL score has
been shown to correlate with high valuing of hedonism, excitation,
and comfort. 116 A high PIL has been shown to correlate with strong re-
ligious beliefs that play a central role in the individual's life. 116 (How-
ever, another study fails to replicate this finding. 117 ) Another study
demonstrates a correlation between a high PIL and conservatism, anti-
hedonism, religious-puritanical values, and idealism. 118 Successfully
matriculating Dominican nuns have higher PIL scores than have their
less successful cohorts. 119 Two studies demonstrate that a high purpose
in life is associated with low death anxiety. 120
   Earlier I discussed how involvement in a meaningful group or cause
increases one's sense of meaning. Several studies have tested this con-
cept and demonstrate that a high PIL score is correlated with involve-
ment in organized groups (either religious, ethnic, political, or commu-
nity service) 121 and involvement in sports and hobbies. 122 (One study,
however, reveals no correlation between social activism [civil rights
demonstrations] and PIL. 123 Could this be a result of the presence of
some of Maddi's "crusaders"?) An Australian study reports a correla-
tion between high PILand a positive world view, goal orientation, and
self-transcendent goals (that is, interests that extend beyond the indi-
vidual's material and mental well-being). 124 Another study indicates
 that high PIL undergraduates are significantly more likely to have
 made vocational choices than are those with low PIL scores. 12.s How-
458


10 I Meaninglessness
ever, a study of business executives and nurses indicates no relation-
ship between PIL scores and work attitudes or work motivation. 126
   Finally, it has been shown that ghetto residents, blacks 127 or Mexican-
Americans128 have lower PIL scores. There are contradictory findings
on the general relationship between PIL and social-economic class129
and also between males and females-with males generally found to
have higher PIL scores. 130
   The Life Regard Index. Before considering the implications of these
findings, let me briefly examine one other instrument designed to
study life meaning. The Life Regard Index (John Battista and Richard
Almond) is more conceptually sophisticated than the PIL but has
unfortunately had no subsequent use. 131 The instrument differentiates
"framework" items (such as "I have a clear idea of what I'd like to do
with my life") from fulfillment items (such as "I feel that I am living
fully"). The authors suggest that both a framework and a belief that
one is fulfilling that framework is necessary to a sense of life meaning.
The instrument was successfully validated via interviews of subjects,
correlates highly with the PIL, and is probably free of the confounding
effects of social desirability. The relation between self-esteem and
a life-regard (meaning in life) was explored. The authors concluded
that a satisfactory level of self-esteem is necessary but not sufficient
for a well-developed sense of meaning: that is, it is possible for an in-
dividual with high self-esteem to have low meaning in life but not
for one with low esteem to have high meaning. One must, as Erik Erik-
son suggested, solve the task of establishing self-worth and per-
sonal identity before being able to develop a satisfying sense of life
meaning.
   The research suggests that positive life meaning is dependent upon
some fit between one's goals and values and the roles and needs of the
social structure in which one is enmeshed. Finally, the authors demon-
strated that one has a greater sense of meaning if one perceives oneself
as approaching one's goals at a satisfactory rate.
   Summary of Research Results. The empirical research on meaning in
life corroborates the following:
    1. A lack of sense of meaning in life is associated with psychopathology in
       a roughly linear sense: that is, the less the sense of meaning, the greater
       the severity of psychopathology.
    2. A positive sense of meaning in life is associated with deeply held reli-
       gious beliefs.
    3. A positive sense of life meaning is associated with self-transcendent
       values.
                                                                              459


                                    IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
    4. A positive sense of meaning in life is associated with membership in
       groups, dedication to some cause, and adoption of clear life goals.
    5. Life meaning must be viewed in a developmental perspective: the types
       of life meaning change over an individual's life; other developmental
       tasks must precede development of meaning.
   A caveat: it is important to note the wording of these conclusions.
The phrase "is associated with" recurs: for example, a low sense of
meaning in life "is associated with" psychopathology. That does not
mean, however, that there is any evidence that the absence of meaning
causes psychopathology. All the research studies are correlative: they
merely demonstrate that diminished life meaning and pathology co-
occur. One might equally well argue from this research that dimin-
ished life meaning is a function-that is, a symptom-of pathology. In-
deed, one study demonstrates that in depressed patients, the sense of
life meaning is dramatically increased by electroshock therapy! 132
460


                CHAPTER 1 1
              Meaninglessness
           and Psychotherapy
IN the previous chapter I approached the question of life meaning as
it is conventionally framed. Meaning-in-life is an important psycho-
logical construct which prima facie relates deeply to all of us. I accepted
this construct at face value and, accordingly, discussed the array of
meaning-offering life activities, and described the pathological clinical
manifestations of the phenomenological state of meaninglessness.
   Now I shall turn to the immediate everyday problem of therapists
who are confronted with patients who state that they have no meaning
in life. A therapist who accepts a patient's formulation of the problem
is likely to share that patient's sense of entrapment. Such a therapist is
reminded of his or her personal incomplete quest for meaning in life.
How is it possible, the therapist wonders, for one to solve something
for someone else one cannot solve for oneself? The therapist may well
conclude that the problem is insoluble, and find ways to circumvent it
in therapy.
   To avoid this untherapeutic sequence of events, the therapist's first
step must be not to accept at face value the patient's formulation of the
problem. Instead, the therapist must rigorously examine the legitimacy
                                                                        461


                                   IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
of the complaint that "life has no meaning." If one analyzes the
ground on which the complaint rests-that is, the meaning of the ques-
tion, "What meaning is there in life?"-one learns that, often to a great
extent, the question is primitive and contaminated.
   For one thing, the question, as conventionally posed, assumes that
there is a meaning to life that a particular patient is unable to locate.
The question is in conflict with the existential view of the human be-
ing as a meaning-giving subject. There is no pre-existing design, no
purpose "out there." How could there be one when each of us consti-
tutes our own "out there"?
   Another major problem inherent in questions about life meaning is
that they are so often confounded with a host of other issues. When
these other concerns are dissected and discarded, the patient's primary
meaning crisis is less lethal and far more manageable. I shall attempt to
refine the clinical question of meaning in life by first considering why
we need meaning and then examining the various concerns that often
obscure the question.
                     Why Do We Need Meaning?
Decades of empirical research have established that our perceptual
neuropsychological organization is such that we instantaneously pat-
tern incoming random stimuli. The gestalt movement in psychology
founded by Wolfgang Kohler, Max Wertheimer, and Kurt Koffka has
spawned an enormous amount of research both in perception and in
motivation which demonstrates that we organize molecular stimuli as
well as molar behavioral and psychological data into gestalten, into con-
figurations or patterns. Thus, when presented with random dots on
wallpaper, one organizes them into figure and ground; when confront-
ed with a broken circle, one automatically perceives it as complete;
when presented with diverse behavioral data-for example, a strange
noise at night, an unusual facial expression, a senseless international
incident-one makes "sense" out of it by fitting it into a familiar ex-
planatory framework. When any of these stimuli or situations do not
lend themselves to patterning, one feels tense, annoyed, and dissatis-
fied. This dysphoria persists until a more complete understanding per-
mits one to fit the situation into some larger, recognizable pattern.
462


11 I Meaninglessness and Psychotherapy
  The implications of such meaning-attribution tendencies are obvi-
ous. In the same way we face and organize random stimuli and events
in our daily world, so too we approach our existential situation. We ex-
perience dysphoria in the face of an indifferent, unpatterned world
and search for patterns, explanations, and the meaning of existence.
   When one is unable to find a coherent pattern, on feels not only an-
noyed and dissatisfied but also helpless. The belief that one has deci-
phered meaning always brings with it a sense of mastery. Even if the
meaning-schema that one has discovered involves the idea that one is
puny, helpless, or dispensable, it is nonetheless more comforting than
a state of ignorance.
   It is evident that we crave meaning and are uncomfortable in its ab-
sence. One finds a purpose and clings to it for dear life. Yet the purpose
one creates does not relieve discomfort effectively if one continues to
remember that one forged it. (Frankl compares the belief in personally
constructed, or "invented," life meanings to climbing a fakir's rope
that one has oneself thrown into the air.) It is far more comforting to
believe that the meaning is "out there," and that one has discovered it.
Viktor Frankl insists that "meaning is what is meant by a situation
which implies a question and calls for an answer .... There is one solu-
tion only to each problem, the right one; and there is one meaning
only to each solution, and that is its true meaning." 1 He takes issue
with Sartre's position that one of the burdens of being free is that one
must invent meaning. Throughout his writing Frankl asserts: "Mean-
ing is something to be found rather than given. Man cannot invent it
but must discover it." 2 Frankl's position is basically religious and rests
on the assumption that there is a God who has ordained a meaning for
each of us to discover and fulfill. Even though we cannot comprehend
the meaning in its entirety, Frankl insists we must accept on faith that
there is a coherent pattern to life and a purpose to man's suffering. Just
as the experimental animal cannot comprehend the reason for its pain,
so too is it with human beings who cannot discover their meaning be-
cause it lies in a dimension beyond their comprehension. Yet are the
basic premises of this argument tenable? After all, if there were a God,
why should it follow that He had a purpose for life and, above all, a
purpose for each of us. Let us not forget that it is man, not God, who is
obsessed with purpose.
MEANING IN LIFE AND VALUES
   Thus, one meaning of meaning is that it is an anxiety emollient: it
comes into being to relieve the anxiety that comes from facing a life
                                                                       463


                                         IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
and a world without an ordained, comforting structure. There is yet an-
other vital reason why we need meaning. Once a sense of meaning is
developed, it gives birth to values-which, in turn, act synergistically
to augment one's sense of meaning.
   What are values and why do we need them? Tolstoy in his crisis of
meaning not only asked Why questions ("Why do I live?") but also
How questions, ("How shall I live? By what shall I live?")-all of
which expressed a need for values-some set of guidelines or princi-
ples to tell him how to live.
   A standard anthropological definition of a value is: "A conception, ex-
plicit or implicit, distinctive of an individual or characteristic of a group, of the
'desirable' which influences the selection from available modes, means, and
ends of action"(my italics). 3 In other words, values constitute a code ac-
cording to which a system of action may be formulated. Values allow
us to place possible ways of behaving into some approval-disapproval
hierarchy. For example, if one's meaning schema stresses service to
others, then one is easily able to develop guidelines, or values, that
permit one to say "this behavior is right or this behavior is wrong." I
have stressed in earlier chapters that one creates oneself by a series of
ongoing decisions. But one cannot make each and every decision de
novo throughout one's life; certain superordinate decisions must be
made that provide an organizing principle for subsequent decisions. If
that were not the case, much of life would be consumed by the turmoil
of decision making.
   Values not only provide the individual with a blueprint for personal
action but also make it possible for individuals to exist in groups: "So-
cial life," Clyde Kluckholm tells us, "would be impossible without
them .... Values add an element of predictability to sociallife." 4 Those
belonging to a particular culture have some shared conception about
"what is" and, from this conception, develop a shared belief system
about "what must be done." Social norms emanate from a meaning
schema that has the consensus of the group, and provide the predicta-
bility necessary for social trust and cohesion. A shared belief system
not only tells individuals what they ought to do but what others prob-
ably will do as well.
MEANING OF LIFE AND OTHER ULTIMATE CONCERNS
   Our human needs for overall perceptual frameworks and for a sys-
 tem of values on which to base our actions together constitute the
"pure" reasons that we search for meaning in life. Generally, however,
 the question of meaning is contaminated: issues other than meaning
 per se are attached to and confound it.
464


11 I Meaninglessness and Psychotherapy
   Return for a moment to Tolstoy, who often asked: "Is there meaning
in my life which will not be destroyed by the inevitable death awaiting
me?" 5 "All my acts, whatever I do, will sooner or later be forgotten and
I myself be nowhere. Why, then, busy one's self with anything?" 6
These questions are not about meaning but about meta-meaning con-
cerns, and revolve about the issue of transience: will we leave anything
enduring behind us? Do we vanish without a trace and, if so, how can
our life matter? Is everything pointless if, as Bertrand Russell lament-
ed, "All the labors of the ages, all the devotion, all the inspiration, all
the noonday brightness of human genius, are destined to extinction in
the vast death of the solar system, and the whole temple of man's
achievement must inevitably be buried beneath the debris of a uni-
verse in ruins?" 7
   Ernest Becker argues persuasively that our "universal ambition" is
"prosperity" (that is, "continued experience"), and that death is the
chief enemy with which we must contend. Human beings try to tran-
scend death not only in the many ways discussed in the first section of
this book but also through "counting" or mattering or leaving some-
thing of themselves behind:
       Man transcends death not only by continuing to feed his appetites (that
       is, in simple-minded blissful visions of heaven] but especially by finding a
       meaning for his life, some kind of larger scheme into which he fits .... It is
       an expression of the will to live, the burning desire of the creature to
       count, to make a difference on the planet because he has lived, has
       emerged on it, and has worked, suffered, and died. 8 (my italics)
   Thus, the wish to leave something behind of one's self to matter, to
make a difference, Becker would argue, is an expression of an effort to
transcend death. Meaning, used in the sense of one's life having made
a difference, of one's having mattered, of one's having left part of one-
self for posterity, seems derivative of the wish not to perish. When Tol-
stoy lamented that there was no meaning in his life that would not be
destroyed by the inevitable death awaiting him, he was stating not that
death destroyed meaning but that he failed to find a meaning that
would destroy death.
   We too easily assume that death and meaning are entirely interde-
pendent. If all is to perish, then what meaning can life have? If our so-
lar system is to be ultimately incinerated, why strive for anything? Yet
though death adds a dimension to meaning, meaning and death are not
fused. If we were able to live forever, we would still be concerned
about meaning. What if experiences do pass into memory and then ul-
timately fade? What relevance does that have for meaning? That hap-
                                                                                465


                                     IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
pens to be the nature of experiences. How could it be otherwise? Expe-
riences are temporal, and one cannot exist outside of time. When they
are over, they are over, and nothing can be done about it. Does the past
vanish? Is it true, as Schopenhauer said, that "what has been exists as
little as what has never been"? Is memory not "real"? Frankl argues
that the past is not only real but permanent. He is sorry for the pessi-
mist who despairs when he watches his wall calender grow thinner
each day as a sheet is removed, and admires the man who saves each
successive leaf and reflects with joy on the richness experienced in the
days represented by the leaves. Such a person will think: "Instead of
possibilities, I have realities." 9
   We are dealing with value judgments not with statements of fact. It is
by no means an objective truth that nothing is important unless it goes
on forever or eventually leads to something else that persists forever.
Certainly there are ends that are complete unto themselves without requiring
an endless series of justifications outside ourselves. As David Hume
said in the eighteenth century, "It is impossible that there can be a
progress ad infinitum, and that one thing can always be a reason why
another is desired. Something must be desirable on its own account and be-
cause of its immediate accord or agreement with human sentiment or
affection." (my italics) 10 If no ends were complete unto themselves, if
everything had to be justified by something else outside of itself which
must in its turn also be justified, then there is infiniL' regress: the chain
of justification can never end.
   Not only does death anxiety often masquerade as meaninglessness,
but the anxiety stemming from awareness of freedom and isolation is
also frequently confused with the anxiety of meaninglessness. Envi-
sioning existence as part of some grand design that exists "out there"
and in which one is assigned some role is a way of denying one's free-
dom and one's responsibility for the design and structure of one's own
life and a way of avoiding the anxiety of groundlessness. Fear of abso-
lute loneliness also propels one into a search for identification with
something or someone. To be part of a larger group or to dedicate one-
self to some movement or cause are effective ways of denying isolation.
MEANING OF LIFE-A CULTURAL ARTIFACT?
   The question of meaning in life is not only confounded by issues be-
longing to the ultimate concerns of death, freedom, and isolation, but it
is also extraordinarily difficult to comprehend it free of the biases in-
herent in a particular culture. A cartoon I once saw illustrates the prob-
lem aptly. It depicts a bevy of eager American travelers listening to the
466


11 I Meaninglessness and Psychotherapy
words of a bearded Tibetan holy man on a precipitous mountain peak.
The caption read: "The purpose of life? If I knew that I'd be rich!"
   The cultural bias illustrated by the cartoon influences the views of a
prominent psychiatrist who, when writing on meaning in life, asserts
with full conviction:
       No human can always achieve, always create. No human being can be
       continuously successful in his endeavors. But to go in the right direc-
       tion, not to have achieved, but achieving, not arriving at the inn but
       walking toward the inn, not resting on the laurels, but moving towards
       the laurels, putting one's talents to the most constructive, productive
      and creative use-this is perhaps the main sense of life and the only pos-
       sible answer to the existential neurosis which cripples human efforts
       and maims human minds.    11
With the same sense of conviction Frankl describes "achievement" or
"accomplishment" as an "obvious and self-evident" category of life
meaning. 12
   But is it obvious? Is striving, creating, achieving, or progressing part
of existence, part of the deepest layers of human motivation? The an-
swer is, most assuredly, no. There were other eras in our own culture
where goal-directed striving was by no means accepted as a commonly
sanctioned mode of finding meaning in life. An inscription on a sun-
dial of great antiquity states: Horas non numero nisi serena ("The hours
don't count unless they're serene"). Fromm notes that man's burning
ambition for fame and lasting achievement has been common from the
Renaissance up until the present day whereas it was little seen in medi-
eval man. Furthermore, in northern European countries it was not un-
til the sixteenth century that man's obsessional craving to work first
appearedY The belief in "progress," that civilization was inexorably
heading in a desirable direction, is, similarly, a notion of relatively re-
cent origin which did not take recognizable shape until the end of the
seventeenth century.
   Other contemporary cultures take issue not only with an achieve-
ment-oriented sense of life purpose but with the very concept of ''pur-
pose in life." One of the most articulate spokesmen for an alternate
view is D. T. Suzuki, the Zen master. In an extraordinarily luminous es-
say/4 Suzuki illustrates two opposing postures to life by comparing two
poems. The first, a seventeenth-century haiku by Basho, reads:
       When I look carefully
       I see the Nazuma blooming
       By the hedge!
                                                                           467


                                     IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
The second, a verse by Tennyson reads:
       Flower in the crannied wall,
       I pluck you out of the crannies;-
       Hold you here, root and all, in my hand.
       Little Flower-but if I could understand
       What you are, root and all, and all in all
       I should know what God and man is.
In the haiku Basho simply observes carefully a Nazuma (an inconspicu-
ous, unpretentious, almost negligible plant) blooming by the hedge.
The haiku conveys (though, Suzuki tells us, its subtlety is lost in trans-
lation) a tender, humble, close, and harmonious relationship to nature.
Basho is quiet; he feels much but gently allows his last two syllables
(called a "Kana" in Japanese and appropriately rendered in English by
an exclamation point) to convey what he feels.
   Tennyson is eloquent and active. He plucks the flower, he tears it
away from nature "root and all" (which means that the plant must die)
and inspects it closely (as though to dissect it). Tennyson attempts to
analyze and to understand the flower; he stands away from it in a sci-
entifically objective fashion. He uses the flower to know something
else. He transforms his meeting with the flower into knowlege and, ul-
timately, into power.
   Suzuki suggests that this contrast illustrates Western and Eastern at-
titudes toward nature and, by implication, toward life. The Westerner
is analytical and objective and attempts to understand nature by dis-
secting and then subjugating and exploiting it. The Oriental is subjec-
tive, integrative, totalizing, and he attempts not to analyze and harness
nature but to experience and harmonize with it. The contrast, then, is
between a searching-action mode and a harmonizing-union one, and
often is phrased in terms of "doing" versus "being."
   If we step outside of our contemporary skins and look backward, we
readily see that our posture toward "purpose" has undergone a gradual
evolution. The early Christians valued contemplation above all else.
Recall Christ's words: "They sow not, neither do they reap nor gather
in the fields; yet your heavenly father feedeth them"; 15 or "Consider
the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they
spin." 16 The early Christians viewed work and wealth not as goals to be
pursued but as obstructions, which clogged the mind with care and
consumed the time that should be spent in the service of God. In the
early monasteries the lay brothers did the manual labor; artistic expres-
sion (manuscript illustration) was more highly valued, whereas con-
468


11 I Meaninglessness and Psychotherapy
templation was considered the most holy endeavor. That hierarchy is
apparent in the stone carvings on Romanesque cathedral fa~ades.
   In the late Middle Ages human beings began to yearn to know the
laws of nature and to work toward active subjugation of the physical
world. A central motif in thirteenth-century astrological tracts was
"The wise man will dominate the stars." Renaissance man explicitly as-
sumed an active stance toward the world. Men like Leonardo da Vinci,
Giordano Bruno, and Benvenuto Cellini believed the world existed to
be transformed, and they rescued the concept of work (and of crafts-
manship) from the neglect into which it had fallen.
   In the sixteenth century John Calvin proposed a theological system
that has, ever since, greatly influenced the West's attitudes toward life
purpose. Calvin believed that humans were predestined by God's grace
to be either elected or damned. The elected intuitively knew of their
foreordained salvation and, by God's wish, were to participate actively
in the affairs of this world. In fact, Calvin said that a sign that one was
of the elect of God was one's worldly success. The damned, on the oth-
er hand, were the failures in worldly life.
   The Puritan tradition, influenced by Calvin, and from which we are
not yet entirely unshackled, valued sacrifice, hard work, ambition, and
social position. Work was considered godly; the devil found work for
idle hands. One's nation was viewed as a rowboat; each person was
part of the crew and had to pull his or her own oar. 17 One could either
row or be excess baggage-a parasite on the others. This ethic worked
wonderfully well for the economic vitality of the young and develop-
ing United States; but for generations of individuals who in one way or
another did not feel that they measured up, it set the stage for feelings
of guilt and worthlessness.
   The Western world has, thus, insidiously adopted a world view that
there is a "point," an outcome of all one's endeavors. One strives for a
goal. One's efforts must have some end point, just as a sermon has a
moral and a story, a satisfying conclusion. Everything is preparation
for something else. William Butler Yeats complained: "When I think of
all the books I have read, wise words heard, anxieties given to parents
... of hopes I have had, all life weighed in the balance of my own life
seems to me a preparation for something that never happens." 18
  A useful language for discussing this Western world view may be
borrowed from aesthetics, where a distinction may be made, in a musi-
cal composition, between passages that have "introduction" (or "prep-
aration") quality and those that have "exhibition" (or "fulfillment")
quality. 19 In the West we view our life's activities in the same way: past
                                                                        469


                                    IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
and present are preparation for what is to follow. But what is to follow?
If we have no belief in an immortality system, then we come to feel
that life is all preparation without "exhibition" quality. The sentiments
"pointless" or "senseless" follow naturally from this belief.
   It must be remembered, however, that art is not life. The distinction
of art is that it can provide a balance of "preparation" and "exhibition"
in a way that life cannot. The belief that life is incomplete without goal
fulfillment is not so much a tragic existential fact of life as it is a West-
ern myth, a cultural artifact. The Eastern world never assumes that
there is a "point" to life, or that it is a problem to be solved; instead,
life is a mystery to be lived. The Indian sage Bhaqway Shree Rajneesh
says, "Existence has no goal. It is pure journey. The journey in life is so
beautiful, who bothers for the destination?" 20 Life just happens to be,
and we just happen to be thrown into it. Life requires no reason.
                      Psychotherapeutic Strategies
I began this chapter by stating that an important first step for the thera-
pist is to reformulate the patient's complaint of meaninglessness in or-
der to discover the presence of "contaminating" issues. The experience
of meaningless may be a "stand-in" for anxiety associated with death,
groundlessness, and isolation; and the therapist is well advised to ana-
lyze and approach these concerns along the lines discussed in previous
chapters of this book. Often the therapist may be useful to the patient
by maintaining a relatively culture-free perspective toward meaning
and by helping the patient appreciate that "meaning" is highly rela-
tive. The formula that since life has no clear purpose, it follows that life
is not worth living is based on culture-bound, arbitrary assumptions.
   What other technical options are available to the therapist? I shall re-
view the literature dealing with clinical approaches to meaninglessness
but will first note that it is an impoverished literature. Aside from a
few scattered clinical notes describing exhortative techniques and some
superficial techniques offered by Frankl, the literature is mute.
   Why should this be so? Perhaps it is because meaninglessness is so
frequently a compound or derivative (rather than an elemental) con-
cern, and appropriate therapist techniques have been developed and
described elsewhere in appropriate contexts. Perhaps meaninglessness
470


11 I Meaninglessness and Psychotherapy
is such an inherently baffling issue that it defies the development of
successful technology. Accordingly, therapists may have learned to in-
attend selectively to the issue and to identify only those questions for
which they have an answer. This is a discouraging state of affairs; but
to those clinicians who are searching for a purpose in their clinical in-
vestigative careers, it could be a beckoning opportunity. This chapter
gathers together a wide range of reflections on the problem of mean-
inglessness with the intention of providing a horizon against which
therapists may fashion new and creative responses to an old problem.
THE THERAPIST'S "SET"
   When the therapist approaches conflicts involving the ultimate con-
cerns of death, freedom, and isolation, one of his or her first acts is
"mind-setting." The same act is required of the therapist dealing with
meaninglessness. Therapists must increase their sensitivity to the issue,
listen differently, become aware of the importance of meaning in the
lives of individuals. For many patients, the issue is not crucial: their
lives seem filled with meaning. But for others the sense of meaning-
lessness is profound and pervasive. Therefore, therapists must be at-
tuned to meaning, they must think about the overall focus and direc-
tion of the patient's life. Is the patient in any way reaching beyond
himself or herself, beyond the humdrum daily routine of staying alive?
I have treated many young adults who were immersed in a California
singles' life style which is characterized to a large degree by sensuality,
sexual clamor, and pursuit of prestige and materialistic goals. In my
work I have become aware that therapy is rarely successful unless I
help the patient focus on something beyond these pursuits.
    But how? How does the therapist effect such a refocusing? If the
therapist has a heightened sensitivity to the importance of meaning in
life, then the patient will, through picking up subtle cues from the
 therapist, become similarly sensitive to the issue. The therapist will,
 implicitly and explicitly, wonder about the patient's belief systems, in-
quire deeply into the loving of another, ask about long-range hopes
 and goals, explore creative interests and pursuits. I have for example,
 found it singularly rewarding to take an in-depth history of the pa-
 tient's efforts to express himself or herself creatively.
    All of these activities are an integral part of the patient's life. If one is
 to know and to value oneself, one must learn to identify and to value
 these parts. The therapist in order to "care" for the patient must know
the patient as deeply as possible. That includes knowing these mean-
 ing-seeking, meaning-providing activities. I remember one young en-
                                                                             471


                                      IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
gineer, an extraordinarily isolated individual who worked at a solitary
job during the day and spent evenings and weekends tinkering with
his private computer that occupied almost his entire living space. I
found it difficult to relate to him. He seemed restricted, lifeless, inexo-
rably dull, and I often visualized him as a little laboratory mouse sniff-
ing at me in my office. My therapeutic fantasy consisted of blowing up
that damned computer and bringing some people into his life. We
seemed at an impasse: I could develop no sense of caring for him and,
accordingly, could not budge him from his isolated ways. Finally I be-
gan to inquire what he did every evening with his computer. He was
reluctant to answer because he felt much shame about his solitary, re-
clusive, endless tinkering which, for most of his life, had constituted a
symbol of his failure to relate to other people. Eventually, however, he
opened up and spent two hours describing his tinkering in fascinating
detail. Those sessions changed everything in therapy. He and I both fi-
nally understood that the "senseless" tinkering was in truth an impor-
tant form of creative expression and not merely some sublimating or
substitute activity. As a result of this sharing, our relationship became
much closer, and he was willing to share other important secrets with
me. I gradually helped him to bring other people into his life along
with, rather than as a replacement for, his creative work and, finally, to
share that work with others.
DEREFLECTION
   Earlier I described Frankl's dictum that "happiness cannot be pur-
sued, it can only ensue." The more we deliberately search for self-satis-
faction, the more will it elude us. The more we fulfill some self-tran-
scendent meaning, the more happiness will ensue. For patients in
therapy it is necessary that therapists help them take their gaze off
themselves. Frankl describes a specific technique-dereflection-
which in principle involves diverting patients' gaze away from them-
selves, from their dysphoria, from the source of their neuroses and
toward the intact parts of their personalities and the meanings that are
available for them in the world.
   The technique of dereflection, as described by Frankl, is simplistic
and consists of little more than telling the patient to stop focusing on
himself or herself and to search for meaning outside of self. This tran-
scription of Frankl interviewing a nineteen-year-old schizophrenic girl
is representative:
          Frankl: Now you are in a state where reconstruction of your life is the
       task awaiting you! But one cannot reconstruct one's life without a life
       goal, without anything challenging him.
472


11 I Meaninglessness and Psychotherapy
          Patient: I understand what you mean, Doctor; but what intrigues me is
       the question: What is going on within me?
          Frankl: Don't brood over yourself. Don't inquire into the source of
       your trouble. Leave this to us doctors. We will pilot you through the cri-
       sis. Well, isn't there a goal beckoning you-say, an artistic accomplish-
       ment? Are there not many things fermenting in you-unformed artistic
       works, undrawn drawings which wait for their creation, as it were, wait-
       ing to be produced by you? Think about these things.
          Patient: But this inner turmoil ...
          Frankl: Don't watch your inner turmoil, but turn your gaze to what is
       waiting for you. What counts is not what lurks in the depths, but what
       waits in the future, waits to be actualized by you. I know, there is some
       nervous crisis which troubles you; but let us pour oil on the troubled
       waters. That is our job as doctors. Leave the problem to the psychiatrists.
       Anyway, don't watch yourself; don't ask what is going on within your-
       self, but rather ask what is waiting to be achieved by you.
          Patient: But what is the origin of my trouble?
          Frankl: Don't focus on questions like this. Whatever the pathological
       process underlying your psychological affliction may be, we will cure
       you. Therefore, don't be concerned with the strange feelings haunting
       you. Ignore them until we make you get rid of them. Don't watch them.
       Don't fight them!1
   For any patient who is excessively self-absorbed, Frankl feels that a
long search within for causes of the anxiety generally compounds the
problem and is ultimately counterproductive by making the patient
even more self-absorbed. For such a patient he recommends that a
therapist take the position (and convey this position to the patient)
that, because of irreversible factors (the patient's family history, geneti-
cally transmitted anxiety, genetic imbalance of the autonomic system,
and so forth), the patient is destined to experience a high baseline
amount of anxiety, for which there is relatively little one can do except
take medication or engage in exercise or some similar ameliorative ac-
tivity. The therapist must then direct attention toward work on the pa-
tient's attitude toward his or her situation and toward the detection of
meanings available for the patient. 22
   The specific technique depicted in the preceding vignette seems so
authoritarian that it would be distasteful, and most likely ineffective,
for many contemporary American therapists and patients. No doubt
that is to some extent a cultural artifact: the average Viennese citizen is
traditionally more likely to revere professional titles and knowledge.
But it is problematic on another count: the appeal to authority ("we
doctors will pilot you through the crisis") is ultimately undermining to
personal growth, since it blocks the path to one's awareness and as-
sumption of responsibility.
   Frankl's point stands nonetheless: it is often vitally important to shift
                                                                             473


                                       IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
the patient's gaze from himself or herself onto others. The therapist
must find a way to help the patient develop curiosity and concern for
others. The therapy group is especially well suited for this endeavor.
Self-absorbed, narcissistic proclivities are readily apparent, and inevita-
bly the pattern of "taking without giving" becomes a key issue in the
group. Therapists may ask patients to reflect on how others feel at the
moment; therapists may in a flowing, unstructured manner provide
training in empathy for others. In groups of acutely disturbed patients
I have often assigned morbidly self-absorbed patients the task of intro-
ducing new patients to the group and of helping these patients express
their pain and their problems to the others.
DISCERNMENT OF MEANING
   Frankl suggests that it is the therapist's task to comprehend some co-
herent pattern, some meaning gestalt, in what would appear to be the
random and tragic events of life. Often much ingenuity is required of
the therapist, as one of Frankl's cases illustrates. He was consulted by
an elderly, depressed general practitioner who could not overcome the
loss of his wife two years previously. I quote Frankl:
      Now how could I help him? What should I tell him? Well, I refrained
      from telling him anything, but instead confronted him with the ques-
      tion, "What would have happened, Doctor, if you had died first, and
      your wife would have had to survive you?" "Oh," he said, "for her this
      would have been terrible; how she would have suffered!" Whereupon I
      replied, "You see, Doctor, such a suffering has been spared her, and it is
      you who have spared her this suffering; but now, you have to pay for it
      by surviving and mourning her." He said no word but shook my hand
      and calmly left my office. 23
   Frankl cites another example of how he has helped patients to detect
their life meaning. The following transcript is from an interview with
an eighty-year-old woman near death from cancer who was deeply de-
pressed and ridden by anxiety and the feeling that she was useless:
         Frankl: What do you think of when you look back on your life? Has
      life been worth living?
         Patient: Well, Doctor, I must say that I had a good life. Life was nice
      indeed. And I must thank the Lord for what it held to me: I went to the-
      aters, I attended concerts, and so forth.
         Frankl: You are speaking of some wonderful experiences; but all this
      will have an end now, won't it?
         Patient: (thoughtfully) In fact, now everything ends ...
         Frankl: Well, do you think now that all of the wonderful things of
474


11 I Meaninglessness and Psychotherapy
      your life might be annihilated and invalidated when your end ap-
      proaches? (And she knew that it did!)
         Patient: (still more thoughtfully) All those wonderful things ...
         Frankl: But tell me: do you think that anyone can make undone the
      happiness, for example, that you have experienced-can anyone blot it
      out?
         Patient: (now facing me) You are right, Doctor: Nobody can blot it out!
         Frankl: Or can anyone blot out the goodness you have met in your
      life?
         Patient: (becoming increasingly emotionally involved) Nobody can blot it
      out!
         Frankl: What you have achieved and accomplished-
         Patient: Nobody can blot it out!
         Frankl: Or what you have bravely and honestly suffered: Can anyone
      remove it from the past wherein you have stored it, as it were?
         Patient: (now moved to tears) No one can remove it! (After a while): It is
      true, I had so much to suffer; but I also tried to be courageous and stead-
      fast in taking life's blows. You see, Doctor, I regarded my suffering as a
      punishment. I believe in God.
         Frankl: But cannot suffering sometimes also be a challenge? Is it not
      conceivable that God wanted to see how Ana<>tasia will bear it? And per-
      haps He had to admit, "Yes, she did so very bravely." And now tell me:
      Can anyone remove such an achievement and accomplishment from the
      world, Frau Anastasia?
         Patient: Certainly no one can do it!
         Frankl: What counts and matters in life is rather to achieve and accom-
      plish something. And this is precisely what you have done. You have
      made the best of your suffering. You have become an example for our
      patients by the way and manner in which you take your suffering upon
      yourself. I congratulate you on behalf of this achievement and accom-
      plishment, and I also congratulate your roommates who have the oppor-
      tunity to watch and witness such an example. 24
Frankl reports that the interview enhanced the patient's sense of mean-
ingfulness, and that in her remaining week of life the patient's depres-
sion lifted and she died filled with pride and faith.
   Terry Zuehlke and John Watkins report a study in which they treat-
ed twelve dying patients with a similar clinical approach which heav-
ily emphasized the development of meaning. 25 The authors adminis-
tered the Purpose in Life test (PIL) both before and after therapy and
report a significant increase in purpose in life.
   What type of meaning does the therapist help the patient find?
Frankl stresses the uniqueness of each patient's meaning but does not,
as we see from the clinical transcriptions, shrink from hinting broadly
or providing some explicit formed meaning to the patient. The mean-
ings he provides consist of the triad of meaning categories I described
                                                                              475


                                   IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
earlier in this chapter: creative accomplishment, experience, and atti-
tude toward suffering. When stressing either creative accomplishment
or experience, Frankl emphasizes the permanence of the past: accom-
plishments and experiences are stored away and endure forever. When
all other meaning seems obscured by present tragedy and suffering,
Frankl stresses that one may still find meaning in assuming a heroic
stance toward one's fate. One's attitude may serve as an inspiring mod-
el for others-children, relatives, friends, students, or even other pa-
tients on the ward. One's acceptance of inevitable suffering may be
seen as an embracement of God from whom the suffering emanated.
Or, finally, one's heroic attitude toward one's fate is meaningful in it-
self in much the same way that Camus regarded "prideful rebellion" as
the human being's final response to absurdity.
   Frankl's therapeutic technique as illustrated by these two case exam-
ples, which are highly representative of his technical approach, is
problematic for the same reasons that his approach to dereflection is
problematic. In an authoritarian fashion he offers the patient a mean-
ing. But, in so doing, does he not move the patient even farther from
the assumption of full personal autonomy? The same issue emerges
when we examine other therapists who focus on meaning.
   Jung, for example, reports a case in which he also explicitly suggest-
ed a meaning schema to his patient. 26 The patient was a young, ana-
lyzed, secularized, enlightened Jewess with a severe anxiety neurosis.
Jung inquired about her background and learned that her grandfather
was a rabbi who had been widely regarded as a zaddick, a saint who
possessed second sight. She and her father had always scoffed at this
nonsense. Jung felt that he had an insight into the neurosis and told
her: "Now I am going to tell you something you may not be able to ac-
cept. Your grandfather was a Zaddick. ... Your father betrayed these-
cret and turned his back on God. And you have your neurosis because
the fear of God has got into you." The interpretation, Jung reports,
"struck her like a bolt of lightning."
   That night Jung had this dream: "A reception was taking place in my
house and, behold, this girl [the patient] was there. She came up to me
and asked, 'Haven't you got an umbrella? It is raining so hard?' I found
an umbrella and was on the verge of giving it to her. But what hap-
pened instead? I handed it to her on my knees as if she were a
goddess."
   Jung's dream told him that the patient was not just a superficial little
girl, but that she had the makings of a saint. However her life was di-
rected toward flirtation, sex, and materialism. She had no way to ex-
476


 11 I Meaninglessness and Psychotherapy
 press the most essential feature of her nature-namely, that "in reality
 she was a child of God whose destiny was to fulfill His secret will."
 Jung told the patient his dream (as was his wont) and his interpretation
 of it. In a week, he reports, "The neurosis had vanished." (It is rare, in-
 cidentally, for Jung to report a successful brief therapy case.)
     Peter Koestenbaum provides another example of the therapist who
 explicitly directs the patient toward some purpose. 27 The patient, a man
 in his early thirties, had a profound lack of self-worth and personal
 identity stemming in large part from parental neglect during his for-
 mative years. He had considerable amnesia for his life before age eight
 and in therapy persistently bemoaned his lost childhood. The therapist
 felt that one important way the patient could re-create his lost child-
 hood and redefine himself as a person with a childhood was to commit
 himself to a child. The patient and his wife had made a firm contract
 not to have children; therefore, therapist and patient worked out a plan
 by which the latter would dedicate himself to working with a Big
 Brother organization. Koestenbaum reports that this worked out splen-
 didly; contact with a child helped the patient view himself and his past
 differently. A year later the patient and his wife decided to have a
 child, at which point therapy successfully concluded.
 PROGRAMED MEANING
     James Crumbaugh reports on a systematic two-week "crash course"
 logotherapy* program with alcoholics, in which he attempted in a less
 authoritarian way to improve a patient's ability to seek and find mean-
    ,. As I discussed in chapter 10, "logotherapy" is Frankl's term for his psychotherapeutic
approach based on helping the patient regain meaning in life. There is a Logotherapy Jour-
nal, a logotherapy newsletter (with the banner "health through meaning"), a Logothera-
py Institute, and several tests" on logotherapy. Yet, as I have implied earlier, there is, in
my opinion, no coherent logotherapeutic system. Logotherapy consists of improvised at-
tempts to help the patient detect meaning. Logotherapy manuals describe two basic tech-
niques: the first, dereflection, I have already discussed; the second is called "paradoxical
intention" .. and is basically a "symptom-prescription" technique where the patient is
asked to experience and to exaggerage his or her symptoms. Thus, the stutterer is asked
to stutter intentionally, the phobic patient to exaggerate that phobia, the obsessive pa-
tient to obsess even more, the compulsive gambler to lose money intentionally. Paradox-
ical intention is an interesting technique, which Frankl first described in 1938, and it an-
ticipated the similar technique of symptom prescription and paradox employed by the
school of Milton Erickson, Jay Haley, Don Jackson, and Paul Watzlawick. 30 There is some
evidence that it is effective for brief therapy. Yet I cannot persuade myself that it is spe-
cifically related to life meaning. Paradoxical intention helps patients detach themselves
from their symptoms; it allows them to view themselves dispassionately, even humor-
ously; above all, it allows them to appreciate that they can influence-in fact, even cre-
ate-their symptoms. To the extent that paradoxical intention allows one to assume re-
sponsibility for one's symptoms, it may be considered within the domain of existential
therapy; but its function as a technique to provide meaning is, at best, obscure.
                                                                                         477


                                   IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
ing. 31 Crumbaugh makes the assumption that if one is to find some co-
herent pattern in complex life situations, one must be able to perceive
details and events in a comprehensive manner and then to recombine
this data into some new gestalt. Accordingly, the crash program at-
tempts to expand perceptual awareness and stimulate creative
imagination.
   The program for the expansion of perceptual awareness included ex-
ercises in recording visual stimuli (for example, a subject was exposed
to Rorschach cards and to seascape scenes and assisted in the recall of
details). The program for creative imagination consisted of such exer-
cises as viewing a picture on a screen, projecting oneself into the pic-
ture, and relating the picture to some wish based on past experiences.
   The pre-post (two weeks later) PIL tests showed an increase in Pur-
pose in Life scores. However the follow-up time was inadequate, and
one has no way of ascertaining outcome specificity: that is, which fea-
tures of the intensive course were responsible for what results? The in-
ferential leap from visual perception and creative imagination to the
perception of a life meaning schema is broad and strains credulity; but
if positive outcome results are replicated, then a more detailed analysis
of this procedure is warranted.
 ENGAGEMENT: THE MAJOR THERAPEUTIC ANSWER TO
MEANINGLESSNESS
   Let me return for a moment to the suicide note with which chapter
 10 began. Little is known about the man who wrote this note, but this
 much stands out: he was not in life, but had removed himself from life,
 removed himself so far that life and the activity and the experience of
 human beings seemed puny and absurd. Even within his brief fable
 one character (one of the brick-carrying morons) distances himself still
 more by asking why he carries bricks; and from that moment he and
 the writer as well are lost.
   There is something inherently noxious in the process of stepping
 back too far from life. When we take ourselves out of life and become
 distant spectators, things cease to matter. From this vantage point,
 which philosophers refer to as the "galactic" 32 or the "nebula's-eye"
 view 33 (or the "cosmic" or "global" perspective34 ), we and our fellow
 creatures seem trivial and foolish. We become only one of countless life
 forms. Life's activities seem absurd. The rich, experienced moments are
 lost in the great expanse of time. We sense that we are microscopic
 specks, and that all of life consumes but a flick of cosmic time.
   The galactic view presents a formidable problem for therapists. On
478


 11 I Meaninglessness and Psychotherapy
the one hand, it seems unassailably logical. After all, the ability to be
self-aware, to step outside of oneself, to view oneself from a distance is
one of the human being's most valued attributes. It is what makes one
human. In most situations a broader, more comprehensive perspective
generally provides the observer with more objectivity: yet this particu-
lar perspective drains the vitality from life. For one to assume it for
prolonged periods results in profound dispiritedness, and continual
immersion in it may be lethal.
   The tradition of philosophical pessimism, to take one example, is a
natural derivative of the nebula's-eye view; and in the nineteenth cen-
tury its leading spokesman, Schopenhauer, viewed temporality from
such a distance that he concluded that it makes no sense to struggle for
some goal that (from the galactic perspective) vanishes in an instant.
Thus, happiness and goals are unattainable, because they are phantoms
of the future or part of the vanished past. Predictably, he concluded:
"Nothing is worth our striving, our efforts and struggles .... All good
things are vanity, the world in all its ends, bankrupt, and like a busi-
ness which does not cover its expenses.'' 35
   What Can Be Done?      What can the therapist offer to offset the nox-
ious effects of the galactic view? First, there are logical inconsistencies
in the argument that the nebula's-eye view must lead to Schopen-
hauer's position that ''nothing matters, and since nothing matters, life
is not worth living." For one thing, if nothing matters, it should not
matter that nothing matters. In a penetrating essay on the absurd,
Thomas Nagel suggests, in supremely unruffled fashion, that the ab-
surdity that is made evident by the nebula's-eye view is not a prima fa-
cie disaster and simply does not warrant that much distress. 36 The abili-
ty to assume the nebula's-eye view is, Nagel states, one of our most
advanced, precious, and interesting traits and is not agonizing unless
we make it so. To allow it to matter so heavily betrays a failure to ap-
preciate the cosmic unimportance of the situation. Nagel suggests that
a true appreciation of the nebula's-eye view, coupled with the knowl-
edge that it is our strength to be able to assume that view, should per-
mit us to return to our absurd life "laced with irony" instead of with
despair.
   Another fact for therapists to note is that an actual mattering under-
lies the despair associated with the "not mattering" of the galactic
view. For example, though Schopenhaurer concluded that nothing
matters, "nothing is worth our striving," many things mattered to him.
It mattered to him to convince others that things did not matter; it mat-
tered to him to oppose a Hegelian system of thought, to continue writ-
                                                                       479


                                     IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
ing actively until the end of his life, to philosophize rather than to
commit suicide. Even to the man who wrote the suicide note about the
brick-carrying morons, things mattered: it mattered that he try to com-
prehend the human condition and to communicate his conclusions to
others. If he had sought my help before his suicide, I should have tried
to communicate to this "mattering" life-searching part of him.
   Kent Bach suggests another antidote to counteract the toxicity of the
galactic view; keep in mind that, though that view undermines mean-
ingfulness, it does not do so in any absolute sense; rather, it renders
things meaningless only when one is in that cosmic perspective. 37 Such
times are part of one's life-but only part. Meaninglessness is an expe-
riential state; and though it is so consuming that it appears to render
meaningless everything in the past and the future as well as in the pre-
sent, it can do that only when we view our lives from the galactic perspective.
"Meaning" is what something needs to matter only when in that per-
spective. At other times things matter because they matter. Things mat-
ter to us all the time. It matters to me that I communicate these ideas as
clearly as possible. At other times other things matter-relationships,
tennis, reading, chess, talking. Must the fact that these activities don't
matter from the nebula's-eye view, that they don't hang together as
some unified whole, take away their mattering? When things matter,
they don't need meaning to matter!
   This concept has immediate therapeutic implications: the therapist
must help the patient to understand that current doubting (or the
adoption of a new meaning schema) does not vitiate the reality of past
mattering. Three patients come to mind. The first had been a nun for
twenty-five years and then, after losing her faith, had left the order.
Her current depression and sense of anomie was deepened by her be-
lief that she had "lived a lie" for all of her adult life. Another patient
had, at the age of fifty-five, begun writing poetry and soon discovered
that she had enormous talent. I treated her at the age of sixty, when she
was dying of cancer. She was deeply embittered at the fact she had
"wasted" most of her life as a farmer's wife, raising children, washing
dishes, digging potatoes-activities that did not accord to her current
meaning schema. Another patient, in the midst of an acrimonious di-
vorce battle, had been deeply wounded by her husband of twenty
years who attempted to strip meaning from her by exclaiming that he
had never loved her.
   All three patients were helped by the realization that a new meaning
schema or a deep state of doubt (that is, current viewing of life from a
galactic perspective) does not vitiate the mattering that existed at other
times. The former nun gradually understood that her current lack of
480


11 I Meaninglessness and Psychotherapy
faith did not erase the faith she had once had, nor did it erase the good
she had done then as a teacher under the aegis of a different meaning
system. The poet, too, learned in therapy that her earlier life had much
meaning to her at the time. She had raised her children, grown food,
mingled with the cycle of nature; and in the midst of all this her poetry
had been conceived and silently germinated. Her poetry today was a
product of her entire life; its particular character was shaped by her
unique life experiences-even the ancient scraping of dirt from pota-
toes found its place in the vital texture of her verse. The third patient
learned, too, that past mattering was not only imperishable but very
precious. She grew bold in her defense of it and was able to say to her
husband: "If you lived with me for twenty years without loving me,
that's your tragedy! As for me, though I do not love you now, I once
loved you very much and spent many of the best years of my life with
you."
    Engagement in Life. Though some of these philosophic rebuttals to
the state of meaninglessness have some interesting implications for
 psychotherapy, they lack potency and remain for the most part psycho-
 therapeutic curiosities. Reason, in this instance as in all other matters
of therapeutic change, is not in itself sufficient. The therapist requires a
 more potent approach. David Hume, in a famous passage in the Trea-
tise, points the way. As a result of musing while in the galactic perspec-
 tive, he was beset by clouds of doubt ("philosophical melancholy"):
        Most fortunately it happens, that since reason is incapable of dispelling
        these clouds, nature herself suffices to that purpose, and cures me of this
        philosophical melancholy by some avocation, and lively impression of
        my senses, which obliterate all these chimeras. I dine, I play a game of
        backgammon, I converse, and am merry with my friends; and when after
        three or four hours' amusement, I would return to these speculations,
        they appear so cold, and strain'd, and ridiculous, that I cannot find in my
        heart to enter into them any farther.ll8
 Hume's antidote to the meaninglessness inherent in the cosmic per-
spective is engagement; and engagement is Sartre's and Camus's solu-
 tion as well; a leap into commitment and action. Tolstoy chose that so-
lution, too, when he said, "It is possible to live only as long as life
intoxicates us."• And engagement is the therapist's most effective ap-
proach to meaninglessness.
   •But, alas, the tug of the galactic perspective was too great for him, and he concluded
the sentence, "as soon as we are sober again we see that it is all a delusion, and a stupid
delusion.""
                                                                                        481


                                     IV I MEANINGLESSNESS
   Earlier I discussed the hedonistic paradox that the more we explicitly
search for pleasure, the more it eludes us. Frankl argues that pleasure is
a by-product of meaning, and that one's search should be directed
toward the discovery of meaning. I believe that the search for meaning
is similarly paradoxical: the more we rationally seek it, the less we find
it; the questions that one can pose about meaning will always outlast
the answers.
   Meaning, like pleasure, must be pursued obliquely. A sense of mean-
ingfulness is a by-product of engagement. Engagement does not logi-
cally refute the lethal questions raised by the galactic perspective, but it
causes these questions not to matter. That is the meaning of Wittgen-
stein's dictum: "The solution to the problem of life is seen in the van-
ishing of the problem." 40
   Engagement is the therapeutic answer to meaninglessness regardless
of the latter's source. Wholehearted engagement in any of the infinite
array of life's activities not only disarms the galactic view but enhances
the possibility of one's completing the patterning of the events of one's
life in some coherent fashion. To find a home, to care about other indi-
viduals, about ideas or projects, to search, to create, to build-these,
and all other forms of engagement, are twice rewarding: they are in-
trinsically enriching, and they alleviate the dysphoria that stems from
being bombarded with the unassembled brute data of existence,
   The therapist's goal, then, is engagement. The task is not to create
engagement nor to inspirit the patient with engagement-these the
therapist cannot do. But it is not necessary: the desire to engage life is
always there within the patient, and the therapist's clinical activities
should be directed toward removal of obstacles in the patient's way.
What, for example, prevents the patient from loving another individu-
al? Why is there so little satisfaction from relationships with others?
What are the parataxic distortions that systematically poison his or her
relationships? Why is there so little work satisfaction? What blocks the
patient from finding work that is commensurate with his or her talents
or finding pleasurable aspects of current work? Why has the patient
neglected his or her creative or religious or self-transcendent strivings?
   The therapist's most important tool in this context is his or her own
 person, through which the therapist engages with the patient. In the
ways I have discussed earlier, the therapist guides the patient toward
engagement with others by first personally relating deeply and au-
 thentically to the patient. Therapists also, as models of personal com-
 mitment to engagement, may offer themselves as objects with whom
 patients may identify: therapists care about their professional mission;
482


11 I Meaninglessness and Psychotherapy
the growth of other human beings matters to them; they help others,
often in creative ways, to search for meaning.
  1
    In summary, the therapist's first step in dealing with the question of
meaninglessness is to analyze and refine the question. Much that is
subsumed under the aegis of "meaninglessness" belongs elsewhere (ei-
ther as a cultural artifact or as part of other ultimate concerns-death,
freedom, and isolation) and must be treated accordingly. "Pure" mean-
inglessness, especially when it emanates from assuming a detached, ga-
lactic perspective, is best approached obliquely through engagement
which vitiates the galactic perspective.
    This therapeutic approach differs greatly from the therapeutic strate-
gies I have described for dealing with other ultimate concerns. Death,
freedom, and isolation must be grappled with directly. Yet when it
comes to meaninglessness, the effective therapist must help patients to
look away from the question: to embrace the solution of engagement
rather than to plunge in and through the problem of meaninglessness.
The question of meaning in life is, as the Buddha taught, not edifying.
One must immerse oneself in the river of life and let the question drift
away.
                                                                      483
